Poria cocos polysaccharide alleviates multidrug-resistant Klebsiella pneumoniae-induced acute lung injury by modulating the gut-lung axis via gut microbiota remodeling.

The emergence and spread of multidrug-resistant Klebsiella pneumoniae (MDR-KP), which leads to acute
lung injury (ALI) and severe pneumonia, pose a huge challenge to clinical treatment and public
health. Non-antibiotic strategies have recently garnered significant attention as promising avenues
for combating antibiotic resistance. In this study, whole-genome sequencing of an MDR-KP strain
isolated from a deceased goat revealed key genetic features underlying its pathogenicity, including
31 resistance genes mediating broad-spectrum resistance to 14 antibiotic classes, 71 pathogen-host
interaction genes supporting cross-organ infection, and 66 virulence factors enhancing colonization
and immune evasion. Importantly, this clinically isolated strain was found to be pathogenic to both
mice and chickens. Poria cocos polysaccharide (PCP) is a natural immunomodulator, but its effects on
MDR-KP-induced ALI have not been explored. Herein, we investigated the protective effect of oral PCP
and its dependence on gut microbiota remodeling using murine models of intranasal MDR-KP infection
and antibiotic-induced pseudo-germ-free mice. The results showed that PCP pretreatment significantly
alleviated MDR-KP-induced ALI by reducing pulmonary bacterial load (P < 0.01) and suppressing TNF-α
and IL-1β levels in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (P < 0.05). Mechanistically, PCP restored
intestinal barrier function by upregulating tight junction proteins (occludin and claudin-1) and
mucosal defense factors (SIgA and MUC-2), and reversed gut dysbiosis by restoring microbial
diversity and enriching beneficial taxa. These protective effects were largely attenuated in pseudo-
germ-free mice, suggesting that the protection offered by PCP against MDR-KP-induced ALI is
dependent on the gut microbiota. In conclusion, oral PCP alleviates MDR-KP-induced ALI through a gut
microbiota-mediated pathway by remodeling the gut microbiota, reinforcing intestinal barrier
integrity, and regulating the gut-lung axis, providing a novel gut-targeted therapeutic strategy
against drug-resistant KP infections.