
JOURNAL INFORMATION
==============================
NLM Title Abbreviation: eLife
Journal ID: Elife
Journal ID: eLife

eLife

EISSN: 2050-084X
Publisher: eLife Sciences Publications, Ltd

ARTICLE INFORMATION
==============================
PMCID: PMC12419801
PMID: 40923594
DOI: 10.7554/eLife.108061
Article ID: 108061
Article version: 1
Article version: version of record
Subjects: Research Article, Computational and Systems Biology, Genetics and Genomics

The lipocone superfamily, a unifying theme in metabolism of lipids, peptidoglycan and exopolysaccharides, inter-organismal conflicts and immunity

Burroughs A Maxwell https://orcid.org/0000-0002-2229-8771 1 †
Nicastro Gianlucca G https://orcid.org/0000-0002-3133-2441 1 †
Aravind L https://orcid.org/0000-0003-0771-253X aravind@ncbi.nlm.nih.gov 1
1 https://ror.org/01cwqze88 Division of Intramural Research, National Library of Medicine, National Institutes of Health Bethesda United States
Bayer-Santos Ethel Reviewing Editor https://ror.org/00hj54h04 The University of Texas at Austin United States

Walczak Aleksandra M Senior Editor CNRS France

† These authors contributed equally to this work.

Electronic publication date: 2025 Sep 9
Publication date: 2025
Volume: 14
Electronic Location ID: RP108061
2025 Jun 22

License: This is an open-access article, free of all copyright, and may be freely reproduced, distributed, transmitted, modified, built upon, or otherwise used by anyone for any lawful purpose. The work is made available under the Creative Commons CC0 public domain dedication.
License URL: https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/

The Lipocone Superfamily: A Unifying Theme In Metabolism Of Lipids, Peptidoglycan And Exopolysaccharides, Inter-Organismal Conflicts And Immunity 18 6 2025 2025.01.14.632903 bioRxiv 10.1101/2025.01.14.632903 PMC11996534 40236132
10.7554/eLife.108061.1
Comment in: Exploring the origins of a signaling pathway 14 18 9 2025 e108735 eLife 10.7554/eLife.108735 PMC12445918 40964925
Keywords: evolution, immunity, signaling, lipid metabolism, peptidoglycan, Wnt
Keywords: Other, None

Funding: http://dx.doi.org/10.13039/100000092 Division of Intramural Research at the National Library of Medicine (NLM) Burroughs A Maxwell Nicastro Gianlucca G Aravind L http://dx.doi.org/10.13039/100000002 National Institutes of Health Burroughs A Maxwell Nicastro Gianlucca G Aravind L http://dx.doi.org/10.13039/100006229 Oak Ridge Institute for Science and Education Nicastro Gianlucca G The funders had no role in study design, data collection and interpretation, or the decision to submit the work for publication.

Author impact statement: A hitherto unrecognized superfamily of enzymes identified here provides unifying insights spanning lipid metabolism, anti-viral and anti-bacterial immunity, and the origin of developmental regulators like Wnt.
publishing-route: prc

==============================
Wnt proteins are critical signaling molecules in developmental processes across animals. Despite intense study, their evolutionary roots have remained enigmatic. Using sensitive sequence analysis and structure modeling, we establish that the Wnts are part of a vast assemblage of domains, the Lipocone superfamily, defined here for the first time. It includes previously studied enzymatic domains like the phosphatidylserine synthases (PTDSS1/2) and the TelC toxin domain from Streptococcus intermedius, the enigmatic VanZ proteins, the animal Serum Amyloid A (SAA), and a further host of uncharacterized proteins in a total of 30 families. Although the metazoan Wnts are catalytically inactive, we present evidence for a conserved active site across this superfamily, versions of which are consistently predicted to operate on head groups of either phospholipids or polyisoprenoid lipids, catalyzing transesterification and phosphate-containing head group cleavage reactions. We argue that this superfamily originated as membrane proteins, with one branch (including Wnt and SAA) evolving into diffusible versions. By comprehensively analyzing contextual information networks derived from comparative genomics, we establish that they act in varied functional contexts, including regulation of membrane lipid composition, extracellular polysaccharide biosynthesis, and biogenesis of bacterial outer-membrane components, like lipopolysaccharides. On multiple occasions, members of this superfamily, including the bacterial progenitors of Wnt and SAA, have been recruited as effectors in biological conflicts spanning inter-organismal interactions and anti-viral immunity in both prokaryotes and eukaryotes. These findings establish a unifying theme in lipid biochemistry, explain the origins of Wnt signaling, and provide new leads regarding immunity across the tree of life.

Introduction

The canonical Wnt signaling network is central to developmental decisions across animals relating to axis patterning, cell fate, cell migration and proliferation, and systems morphogenesis at many levels (Richards and Degnan, 2009; Jessen et al., 2008; Morata and Lawrence, 1977; Rijsewijk et al., 1987; Sharma, 1973; Nusse and Varmus, 1982; Nusse and Varmus, 1992). Other crucial pathways, dubbed non-canonical Wnt signaling pathways, include those that regulate planar cell polarity and intracellular calcium levels (Komiya and Habas, 2008; Segalen and Bellaïche, 2009; Slusarski and Pelegri, 2007). With these roles in development and homeostasis, dysfunction of Wnt signaling is causally associated with a range of diseases, including diverse cancer types and type II diabetes (Logan and Nusse, 2004; Welters and Kulkarni, 2008). Wnt signaling networks are centered on the secreted Wnt proteins acting as both paracrine and autocrine diffusible, extracellular messenger molecules (Christian, 2000). Wnt proteins are ligands for the N-terminal, cysteine-rich CBD/Fz domains of the Frizzled class of G-protein coupled receptors (GPCRs) (Schulte and Bryja, 2007; Bhanot et al., 1996). Modifications of the Wnt proteins via palmitoleoylation and glycosylation at internal sites are associated with their secretion (Takada et al., 2006). Palmitoleoylation of Wnt occurs at a conserved serine residue and is also required for recognition by the Frizzled receptors (Kurayoshi et al., 2007). Binding of the Frizzled receptor by Wnt recruits the Disheveled (Dsh) protein to its cytoplasmic face, in turn triggering a bevy of downstream responses, resulting in β-catenin stabilization in canonical pathways (Gao and Chen, 2010; Klingensmith et al., 1994). When β-catenin concentrations cross a threshold, it is translocated into the nucleus, where it acts as a transcriptional coactivator, usually with an HMG domain transcription factor, to stimulate multiple transcriptional programs (Kramps et al., 2002; van Tienen et al., 2017; Archbold et al., 2012).

Despite its initial discovery over 40 years ago, the evolutionary origins of the Wnt protein have, until recently, been mysterious (Holstein, 2012). In 2020, our group reported the discovery of the first prokaryotic versions of the Wnt domain (Burroughs and Aravind, 2020). Using comparative genomics, we showed that these bacterial Wnt domains present contexts characteristic of toxins or effectors in biological conflict systems (Burroughs and Aravind, 2020; Aravind et al., 2022). Prompted by these initial observations, we set out to comprehensively identify and computationally characterize the evolutionary relationships of these newly identified Wnt homologs in an effort to understand their evolutionary history and predict their functions.

Consequently, we were able to unify the Wnt family with several other domains into a large superfamily described for the first time herein. These include two biochemically characterized families that were hitherto not known as Wnt homologs: the phosphatidylserine synthase (PTDSS1/2, EC: 2.7.8.29) (Kuge et al., 1997; Kuge et al., 1991; Stone and Vance, 1999) and the toxin domain of TelC from Streptococcus intermedius (Whitney et al., 2017). However, the majority of the families we unify are either reported for the first time or are functionally poorly understood, including the animal Serum Amyloid A (SAA) (Sack, 2018) and the vancomycin resistance protein VanZ families (Arthur et al., 1995; Arthur et al., 1999). Our comparative genomics analyses, paired with existing experimental evidence, suggest that the superfamily is broadly comprised of enzymes operating on lipid head groups (e.g. transesterification reactions) in a diversity of biochemical contexts, notably including the regulation of membrane composition, extracellular biopolymer metabolism, and as effectors in biological conflicts. Thus, we identify a unifying theme across diverse aspects of lipid metabolism.

Results

Identification of the structural core of the Wnt domain

Although the structure of Wnt was described over a decade prior (Bazan et al., 2012; Janda et al., 2012; Chu et al., 2013), its origins have been a mystery as it is phylogenetically restricted to Metazoa. Much attention has been focused on the three extended β-hairpins and a poorly structured loop extruding out of the core, their stabilizing cysteine residues, and the absolutely conserved serine residue, the site of palmitoleoylation (Janda et al., 2012; Zhong et al., 2021; Figure 1A). Our discovery of the first prokaryotic Wnt domains helped define its ancestral α-helical core, revealing the cysteine-rich extensions as Metazoa-specific insertions. Comparison of the core of the metazoan Wnt with AlphaFold structural models of the prokaryotic versions (Burroughs and Aravind, 2020) revealed a shared globular domain composed of five α-helices (Figure 1A). As the prokaryotic homologs retained just the conserved core of the Wnt proteins, we named these the minimal Wnt (Min-Wnt) family. The core helices of the Min-Wnt family contained absolutely conserved sequence motifs (Figure 2), consistent with the enzymatic function we had earlier proposed for them (Burroughs and Aravind, 2020) (see below).

Figure 1. Identification and compositional analysis of the Lipocone superfamily.

(A) The four individual helices forming the core of the Lipocone superfamily are consistently colored across the illustrated representatives. The inter-helix linkers are colored gray, and lineage-specific synapomorphic insertions and extensions are colored light brown. Active site and other residues of interest are rendered as ball-and-stick. Protein Data Bank (PDB) IDs or GenBank accessions used to generate AF3 models are provided. (B) Relationship network of the Lipocone families. The thickness of the edges is scaled by negative-log HHalign p-values. Families are colored according to the community identified by the Leiden algorithm (Traag et al., 2019) (see Methods). (C) Box plots displaying core helix transmembrane propensity scores of individual sequences within different Lipocone families. The horizontal divider represents the boundary between typical transmembrane (TM) and soluble sequences.

Figure 1—source data 1. Transmembrane tendency scores by Lipocone family sequence for (C) and network YAML file for (B).

Figure 1—figure supplement 1. Phyletic distribution patterns of Lipocone superfamily.

(Top) Percentage of genomes containing at least one representative of a given Lipocone family within a discrete phylogeny are reported as colored in the provided legend. (bottom) Bar graph depicting phyletic depth (bar height Di - see methods) and breadth (bar width) for Lipocone clades (see Figure 4). Coloring contrasts membrane-associating clades with diffusible clades.

Figure 1—figure supplement 2. Structural representatives of the Lipocone superfamily.

Representative structures or predicted models from Lipocone families. Core helices (H1, H2, H3, and H4) are colored uniformly across the structures as in Figure 1A. Loops and inserts are outlined and transparent, distinctive features are labeled as appropriate. Protein Data Bank (PDB) IDs or protein sequence identifiers used to generate AF models are provided. The core three ancestral active site positions (see Figure 2) are rendered as ball-and-stick, with carbons colored green and other atoms colored as standard element colors.

Figure 1—figure supplement 3. Critical difference diagram depicting group-wise differences across transmembrane (TM) tendency score distributions in Figure 1C (see Methods).

Groups connected by horizontal bars are not significantly different (Bonferroni-adjusted p>0.05); groups not connected are significantly different (adjusted p<0.05). Three non-linked groups are observed in this diagram: (1) those with clear negative TM propensity scores (containing families predicted to be soluble), (2) those with clear positive TM propensity scores (containing families predicted to insert into the membrane), and (3) those with borderline scores. The third category includes families known to insert into the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) membrane (PTDSS1/2) and those predicted to insert into the outer bacterial membrane (YfiM clade).

Figure 1—figure supplement 4. Structural diversity in the cpCone clade.

Each panel depicts a distinct structural configuration observed in the cpCone clade, colored by a rainbow palette from N- to C-termini (left structure) and by equivalent helix (right structure). All representative structures were selected from the cpCone-1 family, except where noted. AF models are based on sequence provided as NCBI accession number labels.

Figure 1—figure supplement 5. Summary of the Methodology and Main Findings.

(A) Flowchart of research strategy. Research endpoints are shaded in gray circles. Methods are shaded in orange boxes. Resources (e.g. databases, etc.) are shaded in green boxes. Used programs and algorithms are shaded in red boxes. (B) Graphical overview of Lipocone superfamily evolutionary history.

Figure 2. Sequence logo of conserved core elements of the Lipocone families.

These correspond to the core helices H2, H3, and H4. The three conserved active site residue positions are boxed in dotted lines with the inferred ancestral residue indicated at the top of the alignment. Families are grouped and labeled on the left in their higher-order clades.

Having defined this shared core, we initiated sequence-based homology searches in an effort to identify remote homologs. Iterative position-specific sequence matrix (PSSM)-based searches (see Methods) initially recovered animal and bacterial versions of the Serum Amyloid A (SAA) proteins, and further rounds of searching initiated from this set of sequences further recovered a vast collection of additional homologous families. As an example, a search initiated with a bacterial SAA-like sequence from Bdellovibrio bacteriovorus (Genbank acc: AHZ84906.1) retrieved a sequence overlapping with the Pfam models for ‘Domain of unknown function,’ DUF2279 (acc: WP_146898260.1, iteration: 5, e-value: 0.004), DUF4056 domain (acc: MBW8016507.1, iteration: 5, e-value: 0.005), and sequences automatically annotated as ‘YfiM’ in the GenBank database (acc: WP_019077413.1, iteration: 4, e-value: 0.004). Sequence profile-profile searches with HHpred confirmed these relationships and captured more distant ones. For instance, a HHpred search initiated with the Bacteriovorax stolpii Min-Wnt domain (acc: WP_102242990.1, residues 1–109) recovered the Pfam Wnt profile (PF: PF00110.23, p-value: 1.5e-6) and the Pfam SAA profile (PF: PF00277.22, p-value: 3.7e-5). Similarly, a HHpred search initiated with a Gemmatimonadetes sequence (acc: PYP94660.1, residues 75.170) recovered the DUF2279 Pfam profile (PF: PF10043.12, p-value: 5.4E-21), the DUF2238 profile (PF: PF09997.12, p-value: 1.3E-07), and the DUF4056 Pfam profile (PF: PF13265.9, p-value: 2.5E-05), among others.

Exhaustion of these searches, followed by clustering and manual inspection of the multiple sequence alignments of the retrieved sequences (see Methods), revealed a shared four-helix core across all of them, hereinafter referred to as H1 through H4 (Figure 1A). This 4-helix core of the domain was further confirmed by inspection of AlphaFold structural models constructed for representatives of the individual families, along with the rare instances of experimentally determined structures. These comparisons established that the above-mentioned fifth C-terminal helix in the Wnt core is a synapomorphy (shared derived character) restricted to the Wnts and closely related families like SAA (Figure 1A). In all, the results of our clustering analysis tallied 30 distinct families constituting a large superfamily. Remarkably, of these, 17 families had no pre-existing annotations. Phyletic analysis of individual families revealed a range of distributions, ranging from broad conservation in multiple superkingdoms of Life to those restricted to a small number of lineages (see below, Figure 1—figure supplement 1). A relationship network for the superfamily was constructed based on p-value and e-value scores using alignments of each family as a query in HHalign profile-profile searches against the rest (see Methods, Figure 1B). The Leiden community detection algorithm (Traag et al., 2019) was then applied to this network to identify higher-order assemblages (see Methods). These groupings were also supported by structural synapomorphies, such as a circular permutation and versions with a two-stranded ‘handle’ (see below).

The four helices conserved across the superfamily constitute a cone-like structure (Figure 1A), with the helices tending to coalesce on one end and opening out into a pocket on the other, lined by the conserved sequence positions (Figure 1A, Figure 1—figure supplement 2). The core is also marked by a linker between H1 and H2, which adopts characteristic extended conformations in certain families and higher-order groups. While the linkers joining H2 and H3 and H3 and H4 tend to be more constrained, there are some exceptions; for example, the extended loop insert housing the palmitoleoylated serine residue between H2 and H3 in the metazoan Wnt family (Figure 1A).

Dramatic variability in hydrophobicity of the conserved core across the superfamily

We observed that these Wnt-related families dramatically varied in their hydrophobicity. Using an index for transmembrane propensity (Zhao and London, 2006) (see Methods) and comparing that to known transmembrane (TM) segments, we predict that the α-helices in 18 of the 30 families are hydrophobic enough to qualify as TM domains, and show a statistically significant tendency to group to the exclusion of the other families (Figure 1C, Figure 1—figure supplement 3). Thus, these are predicted to be integral membrane domains. Further, these ‘hydrophobic families’ often evince a broader and deeper phyletic distribution pattern than the less-hydrophobic families (Figure 1—figure supplement 1, methods), implying that the ancestral version of the superfamily was likely an integral membrane domain. Thus, their association with the lipid membrane, combined with the cone-like shape of the conserved core (Figure 1A), leads us to refer to the whole superfamily hereinafter as the Lipocone superfamily.

AlphaFold 3-assisted transmembrane topology prediction (Jumper et al., 2021) revealed that 14 of the 17 integral membrane families are consistently oriented with the aperture of the cone-like structure opening toward the outer face of the membrane. This predicted TM topology is also generally consistent with the domain fusions when present: e.g., domains that are typically cytoplasmic and those that have extracellular or periplasmic functions are, respectively, predicted as projecting either inside or outside the membrane (see below). However, three families in the cpCone clade (see below) did not yield consistent orientation predictions, potentially owing to the diversity of structural variations observed in the clade, including a circular permutation event.

A unified biochemistry for the Lipocone superfamily

Of the 30 identified families, 26 display a striking conservation pattern of polar residues associated with the pocket of the Lipocone domain (Figure 2, Figure 1—figure supplement 2). Of these, a set of three positions, one mapping to each of H2, H3, and H4, can be inferred as being ancestrally present and were likely occupied by a histidine (H2), glutamate (H3), and aspartate (H4), though in some families their identities have secondarily changed (Figure 2, Figure 1—figure supplement 2). A fourth well-conserved polar position is observed at or near the end of H3; while its ancestral identity is difficult to establish, it is frequently an aspartate or glutamate (Figure 2). Two further well-conserved positions are often seen in H4: a polar position downstream of the broadly conserved aspartate residue and a glycine residue near the C-terminus of H4 (Figure 2) that likely caps the said helix. Although the ancestral pattern is noticeably degraded in the metazoan Wnt (Met-Wnt) family, it is strongly preserved in the prokaryotic Min-Wnt family (Figure 1A). In experimentally determined and modeled structures, the above set of 4 conserved positions forms a predicted active site in the aperture of the Lipocone domain. This, in turn, implies a shared biochemistry across the superfamily, with secondary inactivation in some families like Met-Wnt (see below, Figure 2). At the same time, the differences in the specific residues in the conserved positions between different families point to a range of distinct but related activities across the superfamily (Bastard et al., 2014; Glasner et al., 2006; Zhang et al., 2014).

Consistent with these observations, two of the families with intact active sites, the PTDSS1/2 (Stone and Vance, 1999; Tomohiro et al., 2009) and TelC (Whitney et al., 2017), which we identified in this work as members of the Lipocone superfamily, have been characterized as active enzymes operating on different lipid substrates (Figure 3A). The eukaryotic PTDSS1/2 localizes to the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) membrane and catalyzes a reaction on the polar head group of phosphatidylcholine or phosphatidylethanolamine (Saito et al., 1996; Stone and Vance, 2000; Miyata and Kuge, 2021). PTDSS1 and PTDSS2, respectively, exchange the phosphate-linked choline or ethanolamine head groups with L-serine (Stone and Vance, 1999; Figure 3A). The toxin domain of TelC acts on lipid II (Whitney et al., 2017), the final intermediate in peptidoglycan biosynthesis, which couples an undecaprenyl diphosphate tail to a head group comprised of a N-acetylmuramic acid-N-acetylglucosamine disaccharide, with a pentapeptide further linked to the former sugar (Anderson et al., 1967; Higashi et al., 1967). TelC cleaves the bond between the undecaprenol and the diphosphate coupled to the head group (Whitney et al., 2017; Figure 3B). The reaction is comparable to that catalyzed by PTDSS1/2, as both attack phosphate linkages in lipid head groups. However, TelC apparently directs a water molecule for the attack in lieu of the hydroxyl group of serine directed by PTDSS1/2 (Figure 3B).

Figure 3. Known and predicted Lipocone reaction mechanisms.

Experimentally supported reactions are boxed in blue (A–B), while a predicted reaction based on genome displacement by a Lipocone domain of an experimentally characterized enzyme is boxed in orange (C). The remaining reactions (D–G) are suggested based on the contextual inferences in this work. Attacking and leaving groups are denoted by dashed green and red circles, respectively.

Combining the above observations, we infer the unified biochemistry for the catalytically active families thus: (1) They act on the head groups of lipids either by removing or swapping phosphate-linked head groups (Figure 3A–B). These would be comparable to the phospholipase D (PLD), transphosphatidylation, or polyisoprenol phosphoesterase reactions (English, 1996). (2) Given the cone-like cavity and the hydrophobicity of the helices, the lipid tail is predicted to be housed within the lipocone with the head group positioned in the active site. (3) In the case of the integral membrane versions, their orientation would predict the targeting of the head groups of the outer leaf of the bilayer.

Major clades of the Lipocone superfamily

The extreme sequence divergence of the superfamily, coupled with the small size of the domain, prevents the use of simple phylogenetic tree analyses to resolve its deep evolutionary history. Hence, we combined community finding algorithms applied on profile-profile similarity networks, comparison of structural features and motifs, and phyletic patterns (Figures 1B and 2, Figure 1—figure supplement 1) to reconstruct the most parsimonious evolutionary scenario for the diversification of the Lipocone superfamily (Figure 4, see Methods). In the below sections, we survey the higher-order clades, highlighting their specific features.

Figure 4. Reconstructed evolutionary scenario for the Lipocone superfamily.

The relative temporal epochs are demarcated by vertical lines and labeled at the bottom. The clades are represented by colored lines indicating the maximum depth to which the families listed to the right can be traced. Colors track the superkingdom-level phyletic distribution of the family. Dashed-line circles indicate uncertainty in the origin of lineage(s). Inferred or experimentally characterized functions for families are indicated to the left of family names. Asterisks denote newly described families.

SAW (SAA-Wnt) clade

This clade consists of four families, with the two prokaryotic families (Min-Wnt and prok-SAA) (Burroughs and Aravind, 2020; Zámocký and Ferianc, 2023), respectively, giving rise to their counterpart eukaryotic families (Met-Wnt and Met-SAA; Figures 1A and 4). This clade is structurally unified by the presence of a fifth helix that stacks in the space between the H2 and H4 helices (Figure 1A, Figure 1—figure supplement 2). In the Wnt families, this helix is comparable in length to the core helices, while in the SAA families, it is usually shorter (Figure 1A). The clade is further unified by the pronounced conservation of a sNxxGR motif (where ‘s’ is a small residue) encompassing the conserved active site position in H4 (Figure 2). SAW clade Lipocones show low overall hydrophobicity and are known or predicted to be soluble domains. Outside of the clearly inactive eukaryotic Wnt family, the remaining three families largely conserve the core active site residues (Figure 2).

VanZ-Skillet clade

This clade unites seven families: the two VanZ families, VanZ-1 and VanZ-2, prototyped by the bacterial VanZ protein originally identified in the context of vancomycin resistance, and the five Skillet families, which form a distinct subclade. These are unified by a ‘handle’-like structure (hence, ‘Skillet’), adopting a helical conformation in the H1-H2 linker (Figure 1A, Figure 1—figure supplement 2). Strikingly, a symmetric helical handle is present in the H3-H4 loop of the Skillet-DUF2809 and Skillet-3 families (Figure 1—figure supplement 2) of this clade. VanZ-1 features a conserved asparagine residue in the H2 position and a DxDDxxxN motif in H4, while VanZ-2 features RKxxH and DxxxD motifs in these respective positions (Figure 2). The Skillet families are largely unifiable in their conservation of an ExxQ motif in H3, an aspartate three positions upstream of the canonical H4 aspartate, and another aspartate in the H2 contributing to the active site. These first two features specifically ally them with the VanZ-1 family (Figure 2).

While the VanZ domain was previously reported as including a fifth TM helix, which is C-terminal to the 4-helix Lipocone core defined here (Woods et al., 2018; Sur et al., 2021), our survey instead reveals a striking diversity of configurations around the core 4-helix Lipocone domain (Figure 5—source data 2). These range from standalone Lipocone configurations to one or more TM-helices adorning the domain at its N- and/or C-terminus. This variation is consistent with a further tendency for the VanZ families to feature an extensive diversity of domain fusions to both soluble globular domains and discrete TM modules (see below).

The VanZ families are deep-branching, as suggested by their wide phyletic spread (Figure 1—figure supplement 1). VanZ-2 is the most widespread individual Lipocone family in bacteria, with several genomes encoding multiple paralogs (Figure 5—source data 2; Woods et al., 2018; Stogios and Savchenko, 2020). It is also found in certain eukaryotes, including a pan-fungal presence and in some representatives of the SAR clade. Both VanZ-1 and VanZ-2 are particularly well-represented in Gram-positive bacterial lineages like Actinomycetota and Firmicutes, while VanZ-2 is nearly universally conserved in the Bacteriodetes/Chlorobi lineage (Figure 1—figure supplement 1). In contrast, only one of the Skillet families, Skillet-DUF2809, is widely but sporadically distributed, with the four others being more restricted (Figure 4, Figure 1—figure supplement 1).

YfiM clade

This clade includes three families that are consistently centrally located in the profile-profile similarity network (Figure 1B). This is likely due to their being close in sequence conservation to the ancestral state of the superfamily (Figure 2). Consistent with this, the YfiM-1 family also presents a structurally minimal Lipocone domain, comprised of just the 4-helix configuration with no further elaborations. Notably, this also extends to a lack of domain fusions in this family. In contrast, YfiM-DUF2279 and YfiM-Griddle (DUF3943) are structurally distinguished by an unusual H1-H2 linker (Figure 1A), which wraps around the outside and stacks against the H3-H4 linker (Figure 1—figure supplement 2). The YfiM-Griddle family further features a unique ‘flattened’ surface around the aperture of the Lipocone formed by protruding loops (hence, ‘Griddle;’ Figure 1—figure supplement 2). This leaves the active site pocket more accessible relative to families with more elaborately structured inter-helix linkers. The Griddle family also features a C-terminal extension with a two-helix hairpin (with a hhsP motif in the turn between the two helices, where ‘h’ is a hydrophobic residue and ‘s’ is a small residue) (Figure 1—figure supplement 2). The three YfiM families straddle the membrane-propensity boundary in the plot (Figure 1C). Furthermore, the YfiM-DUF2279 and Griddle families are strikingly absent in Gram-positive bacterial lineages (Figure 1—figure supplement 1). Concurrent with these features, they are often predicted by the deep-learning-based localization predictor deepTMHMM as outer-membrane proteins, suggesting a role in this subcellular location (see below).

ClaspCone-CapCone-TelC clade

Members of this clade are unified by an elaborated H1-H2 linker that often contains one or more helical segments that are typically predicted to guard the aperture of the Lipocone domain (Figure 1—figure supplement 2). This linker ends in a ‘clasp’-like element, which forms a range of structures in different families of the clade before leading into H2 (Figure 1—figure supplement 2). The clade is also unified by a striking reduction of overall hydrophobicity, predicting that the members of this clade are soluble domains (Figure 1C). Outside of the divergent TelC subclade, most of the families in this clade conserve a serine residue three positions upstream of the active site aspartate in H4, often preceded by an aromatic residue, which is typically phenylalanine. H4 also usually features a conserved asparagine four positions downstream of the conserved aspartate active site position, immediately preceded by a small residue (Figure 2). The second H3 active site position is generally poorly conserved, though when present, it is usually an aspartate residue. Finally, H2 contains either a DK or xD motif four positions upstream of the canonical H2 active site histidine residue (Figure 2).

The most rudimentary clasps are found in the ClaspCone-1,–2, and –3 families, where it is little more than a rounded loop, though, in ClaspCone-1, a small β-hairpin emerges within it. The three ClaspCone families are further unified by the presence of a two-helix insert leading into H2 that stacks against the Lipocone core (Figure 1—figure supplement 2). The three CapCone families, CapCone-DUF4056, CapCone-1, and CapCone-2, are named so for an encasing structure over the active site resembling a cap (Figure 1—figure supplement 2). They share a conserved glycine residue six positions upstream of the active site H2 histidine and a S/GxxSxx motif upstream of the conserved H4 aspartate (Figure 2). They are further unified by a pronounced β-hairpin clasp augmented by an additional strand (Figure 1—figure supplement 2). They also display varying degrees of degeneration of H1, along with family-specific structural elaborations.

The TelC group of this clade, prototyped by the streptococcal TelC toxin (Whitney et al., 2017), is divided into two families featuring prokaryotic (prok-TelC) (Whitney et al., 2017) and metazoan versions (Met-TelC) (Dziarski and Gupta, 2006a). Both TelC families feature a ‘cap’ with contributions from inserts in the H1-H2 and H3-H4 loops (Figure 1A, Figure 1—figure supplement 1). Unique to these families is the conservation of an aspartate residue located six positions downstream of the canonical active site aspartate of H4 (Figure 2). This aspartate points away from the center of the Lipocone and interacts with a conserved arginine from a synapomorphic C-terminal helical extension.

cpCone clade

A widespread yet sporadically distributed clade of seven families emerging as a stable community in the profile-profile similarity network (Figure 1B) is defined by a unique structural synapomorphy: a circular permutation (Bliven and Prlić, 2012) (hence, cpCone) placing the normally N-terminal H1 at the C-terminus of H4 (Figure 1—figure supplements 2 and 4). This clade is also united by unique sequence features, viz., a polar residue (typically aspartate) six positions upstream of the conserved H2 histidine and a second glutamate three positions downstream of the conserved H3 glutamate (Figure 2). While the circular permutation is shared across the clade, several structural variations are seen, often within the same family (Figure 1—figure supplement 4). These include: (1) versions containing a duplication of the Lipocone domain. While the second copy in these versions is catalytically inactive, the H1’ from the second duplicate displaces the H1 from the first copy, suggestive of an intermediate to the circular permutation. (2) Versions retaining a candidate H1 that has been displaced by H1’ in a five-helix arrangement. (3) Those containing just the circularly permuted core. (4) Versions showing a degradation of the H1 helix, preserving just a 3-helix core (Figure 1—figure supplement 4). Despite this propensity for structural variation, the active site residues are strongly conserved, with the exception of the cpCONE-i family, which we infer to be catalytically inactive (Figure 2). The core helices of the cpCone clade are strongly hydrophobic, and they are all predicted to be integral membrane domains (Figure 1C). Consistent with this, the eukaryotic PTSSD1/2 domains reside in the ER membrane (Saito et al., 1996; Stone and Vance, 2000).

Wok family

The Wok family (partly covered by the Pfam DUF2238 model) shows a higher order grouping with the above circularly permuted clade (Figures 1B and 4) but has a phyletic distribution only rivaled by the VanZ-2 family (Figure 1—figure supplement 1), suggesting a deep-branching origin. The shape of this family is reminiscent of a wok formed by two distinguishing structural synapomorphies: a 2-TM helix N-terminal extension and a unique ‘handle’ formed by the linker between the H3 and H4 (Figure 1—figure supplement 2). It additionally features a C-terminal, rapidly diversifying cytoplasmic tail. Despite these elaborations, it retains the inferred ancestral active site configuration (Figure 2). The strongly hydrophobic core helices of the Wok family predict it to be an integral membrane enzyme (Figure 1C).

Functional themes in the Lipocone superfamily

Given our inference of shared general biochemistry across the Lipocone superfamily in targeting phosphate-containing linkages in head groups of both classic phospholipids and polyisoprenoid lipids, we next used contextual information from conserved gene-neighborhoods, domain architectures and phyletic pattern vectors, a powerful means of deciphering gene function (Aravind, 2000), to narrow down the predictions for specific families (Figure 5, Figure 5—source data 1 and Figure 5—source data 2). To this end, we constructed a graph (network) wherein the nodes are individual domains and edges indicate adjacency in domain architectures or conserved gene-neighborhoods (Figure 6, see Methods). We then identified cliques in these networks and merged the individual cliques containing a particular Lipocone domain to define its dense subgraph (Figure 6—figure supplements 1–3). We then analyzed these subgraphs to identify statistically significant functional categories represented in them (Figure 6—source data 1; see Methods). This data was combined with existing experimental results and the sequence and structure analyses outlined above to arrive at the functional themes surveyed in the below sections.

Figure 5. Representative contexts for the Lipocone superfamily, grouped by shared functional themes.

Genes are depicted by box arrows, with the arrowhead indicating the 3’ end of genes. Genes encoding proteins with multiple domains are broken into labeled sections corresponding to them. Domain architectures are depicted by the individual domains represented by distinct shapes. TM segments, lipoboxes (LPs), and signal peptides (SPs) are depicted as unlabeled, narrow yellow, blue, and red rectangles, respectively. All Lipocone domains are consistently colored in orange. Genes marked with asterisks are labeled by the GenBank accession number below each context. Colored labels above genes denote well-known gene names or gene cluster modules. Abbreviations: PTase, peptidase; TFase, transferase; GlycosylTFase, Glycosyltransferase; MPTase, metallopeptidase; TGase, transglycosylase; SLP, serine-containing lipobox; cNMPBD, cNMP-binding domain; NCPBM, novel putative carbohydrate binding module; (w)HTH, (winged) helix-turn-helix; ZnR, Zinc ribbon; PPTs, pentapeptide repeats; Imm, immunity protein; βPs, β-propeller repeats; Cystatin-FD, Cystatin fold domain; MTase, methylase; PGBD, peptidoglycan-binding domain; MβL, metallo-β-lactamase; L12-ClpS, ClpS-ribosomal L7/L12 domain; TA, teichoic acid.

Figure 5—source data 1. Table of Lipocone family conserved contextual associations across distinct functional themes.

Figure 5—source data 2. List of identified genome contexts.

Features and coloring as described in the Figure 5 legend.

Figure 5—figure supplement 1. Multiple sequence alignment of serine-containing lipobox (SLP).

Sequences are labeled to the left by NCBI accession number and organism abbreviations. The conserved serine residue position, denoted at the top of the alignment by an asterisk, is shaded in red, with text colored in white. Other residue positions are colored according to consensus conserved biochemical properties: hydrophobic (h) and aromatic (a) residues are shaded yellow, polar (p) residues are shaded blue, small (s), and tiny (u) residues are shaded green, and positively charged (+) residues are shaded red. Diversity of domains C-terminally fused to the SLP are depicted to the right of the alignment, represented as geometric shapes. Organism abbreviations as follows: Obac: Oscillospiraceae bacterium; Cbac: Clostridia bacterium; Lbac: Lachnospiraceae bacterium; CEqu: Candidatus Equihabitans; Rzha: Roseburia zhanii; Rusp: Ruminococcus sp; Aaut: Aceticella autotrophica; Nthe: Natranaerobius thermophilus; CFim: Candidatus Fimenecus; Busp: Butyrivibrio sp; Eusp: Eubacterium sp; Rbac: Ruminococcaceae bacterium; Chsp: Chryseobacterium sp; Flsp: Fluviicola sp; Zpro: Zunongwangia profunda; Ibac: Ignavibacteria bacterium; Mbac: Myxococcales bacterium; Pbac1: Planctomycetota bacterium; Byua: Bradyrhizobium yuanmingense; Rhsp: Rhodopseudomonas sp; Afer: Acidimicrobium ferrooxidans; Bbac1: Bacillota bacterium; Etay: Eisenbergiella tayi; Rosp: Roseburia sp; Bbac2: Betaproteobacteria bacterium; Pbac2: Pseudomonadota bacterium; Bbac3: Burkholderiales bacterium; Idsp: Ideonella sp; Pisp: Piscinibacter sp; Aant: Algoriphagus antarcticus; Fbac: Flavobacteriales bacterium; Friv: Flavobacterium rivulicola; Mlut: Mongoliitalea lutea; Ga: Gammaproteobacteria; Sysp: Syntrophorhabdus sp; Aadv: Apibacter adventoris; Bbac4: Bacteroidota bacterium; Chsp: Chryseobacterium sp; Spsy: Sphingobacterium psychroaquaticum; mbac: marine bacterium; Ster: Sebaldella termitidis; Abac: Armatimonadota bacterium; Bcla: BD1-7 clade; Gpen: Gallaecimonas pentaromativorans; Kgeo: Kangiella geojedonensis; Ktai: Kangiella taiwanensis; Posp: Porphyromonas sp; Xbre: Xylanibacter brevis; Pmul: Prevotella multiformis; Scop: Segatella copri; Bbac5: Bacteroidales bacterium; Masp: Mariniphaga sp; Pbac3: Prolixibacteraceae bacterium; Dbac: Desulfobacteraceae bacterium.

Figure 5—figure supplement 2. Structural overview of newly identified immunity proteins pairing with toxin-containing proteins in polymorphic and allied toxin systems.

The top panel depicts concordance of core secondary structure elements across BamE-like immunity protein families, with N-terminal α-helix dyad colored in blue and green and the four strands of the core β-meander colored in a yellow, light green, orange, and purple order. The bottom panel depicts rainbow palette coloring of the Jellyroll domain-containing immunity protein and the 4-transmembrane (TM) protein. The Immunity-SAA protein is colored by secondary structure element, with conserved cysteine residues rendered as ball-and-stick. Protein DataBank ID (PDBID) or AF model-generating sequence is provided.

Figure 5—figure supplement 3. Sequence and structure overview of the broken-hairpin domain.

(A) Multiple sequence alignment of broken-hairpin domain, with conserved axR (with ‘a’ representing an aromatic residue, ‘x’ representing any residue, and R representing an arginine residue) motif positions labeled above alignment. Coloring and conserved consensus abbreviations as in Figure 4. (B) AF models of broken hairpin domain, loops colored in gray and strands in orange. axR motifs are rendered as ball-and-stick representations. (C) Selection of domain architectures observed with the broken-hairpin domain, arranged and labeled by general functional theme. Depictions and abbreviations as described in Figures 5 and 6 legends. (D–E) AF models exploring the positioning of the broken-hairpin domain relative to distinct N- or C-terminal effector domains.

Figure 6. Lipocone contextual network.

The network represents the conserved contextual associations of Lipocone domains (hexagonal nodes). Nodes and edges are colored based on known or inferred functional categories of the domains. The nodes are scaled by their degree. Gray coloring indicates domains without specific functional assignments. Examples of conserved gene neighborhoods and domain architectures supplementing those in Figure 5 illustrate contexts that bridge functional themes. Here, individual domains are colored to match network coloring. Additional abbreviations to those in Figure 5: APH-Pkinase, aminoglycoside phosphotransferase-like kinase; HUP, HIGH, UspA and PP-ATPase superfamily-like domain; Alk-phosphatase, Alkaline phosphatase; dehyd, dehydrogenase; TPRs, tetratricopeptide repeats; PMM/PGM, phosphomannomutase/phosphoglucomutase; ZnF, zinc finger; APC-transporter, amino acid-polyamine-organocation transporter; LPS, lipopolysaccharide.

Figure 6—source data 1. Significant enrichment of Lipocone family contextual associations across functional categories.

Figure 6—source data 2. Figure 6 network and node annotation YAML files.

Figure 6—figure supplement 1. Lipocone domain-centered subgraphs of contextual network in Figure 6.

These subgraphs capture significant enrichment of different functional categories (Figure 6—source data 1). Subgraph network nodes, edges, scaling, and coloring as described in Figure 6 legend.

Figure 6—figure supplement 2. Lipocone domain-centered subgraphs of contextual network in Figure 6.

These subgraphs capture significant enrichment of different functional categories (Figure 6—source data 1). Subgraph network nodes, edges, scaling, and coloring are described in Figure 6 legend.

Figure 6—figure supplement 3. Lipocone domain-centered subgraphs of contextual network in Figure 6.

These subgraphs capture significant enrichment of different functional categories (Figure 6—source data 1). Subgraph network nodes, edges, scaling, and coloring are described in Figure 6 legend.

Lipocone domains in membrane lipid, peptidoglycan, and exopolysaccharide modifications

Across different Lipocone families, we found statistically significant connections to roles in modifying lipid head groups in various membranes and in lipids involved in the synthesis of extracellular matrix polymers such as peptidoglycan and lipopolysaccharides (Figure 6, Figure 6—source data 1, Figure 5—source data 2).

Archetypal lipid head group exchange reactions catalyzed by the cpCone clade

One of the few experimentally characterized Lipocone families is the eukaryotic PTDSS1/2 family of the cpCone clade, members of which exchange the head group of essential membrane phospholipids to generate phosphatidylserine from phosphatidylethanolamine or phosphatidylcholine (Figure 3A; Stone and Vance, 1999; Vance, 2018). Given the pervasive presence of this clade in archaea (Figure 1—figure supplement 1), it is thus tempting to speculate that these archaeal cpCones may play a role in the modification of Archaea-specific lipids (Koga and Morii, 2005; Caforio and Driessen, 2017; Řezanka et al., 2023) through a comparable head group exchange reaction (see below).

In bacteria, the related cpCone-1 family shows operonic association with a LolA-like lipoprotein which shuttles lipoproteins to the outer membrane (Narita and Tokuda, 2010) and a novel 4TM protein (Figure 5A). This raises the possibility that cpCone-1 might mediate the formation of membrane domains featuring lipids with a modified head group that act as foci for the trafficking of lipoproteins. Curiously, the cpCone-1 gene might also be inserted between the bacterial chromosome segregation and condensation complex subunits, the Kleisin ScpA and the wHTH ScpB (Kamada et al., 2013; Schleiffer et al., 2003; Soppa et al., 2002; Aravind et al., 2005). The bacterial cpCONE-DUF2585 is operonically coupled to a GNAT family NH2-group-acetyltransferase and further linked to genes for the glycolate oxidase GlcE and GlcF (Pellicer et al., 1996) and the bacterial proteasome subunits HslV and HslU (Ramachandran et al., 2002; Figure 5A, Figure 5—source data 2). These might point to the coupling of membrane lipid head group modifications with disparate processes, such as chromosome segregation during cell division or different responses to stress (Storck et al., 2018; Barák and Muchová, 2013; Hauck and Bernlohr, 2016).

The Wok and YfiM-1 families in cardiolipin and modified isoprenoid lipid pathways

We observed a set of conserved gene neighborhoods displaying the mutually exclusive presence of a synaptojanin-like phosphatase gene, with one encoding either a member of the Wok family or a cardiolipin synthase of the HKD superfamily (Guo and Tropp, 2000; Figure 5B, Figure 5—source data 2). This suggested that the latter two are analogous enzymes catalyzing equivalent reactions. The cardiolipin synthase utilizes two phosphatidylglycerol molecules as substrates to generate cardiolipin with the release of one of the glycerol head groups (Tan et al., 2012). This is comparable to the head group exchange reaction catalyzed by PTDSS1/2 from the cpCone clade (Figure 3A). Hence, we propose that these members of the Wok clade are cardiolipin synthases (Figure 3C). Distinct phosphoesterases, namely the synaptojanin-like, calcineurin-like (Aravind and Koonin, 1998a) and HAD (Burroughs et al., 2006) enzymes, are also observed in gene-neighborhood associations with the Wok, suggesting that they might together regulate membrane lipid composition by acting on the phospholipids or their precursors (Figure 5C). In a distinct neighborhood, the Wok clade enzyme is coupled to carotenoid biosynthesis genes (Vershinin, 1999; Šesták et al., 2004). (Figure 5D, Figure 6—figure supplement 1). This raises the possibility that these members might also catalyze a comparable reaction to the above on isoprenoid lipids: for instance, they could synthesize a carotenoid from two geranylgeranyl-diphosphate molecules (Sandmann and Misawa, 1992; Chamovitz et al., 1992). In both of these contexts, the actinobacterial operons often include genes for GT-A family glycosyltransferases, suggesting the further synthesis of glycosylated derivatives of the lipids or carotenoids (Liu and Mushegian, 2003; Figure 5—source data 2). In several bacteria, a YfiM-1 family Lipocone is operonically coupled to a UbiA-like prenyltransferase (Tran and Clarke, 2007). This gene neighborhood additionally codes for a slew of enzymes, such as an amidophosphoribosyltransferase (Massière and Badet-Denisot, 1998), a RidA-like deaminase (Liu et al., 2016), and a pair of structurally distinct phosphoesterases, respectively, containing an HD and a PHP domain (Aravind and Koonin, 1998a; Aravind and Koonin, 1998b; Figure 5E, Figure 6—figure supplement 1, Figure 5—source data 2). This suggests a role for the YfiM-1 Lipocone and the associated enzymes in generating a modified polyisoprenoid metabolite.

VanZ families modifying lipid head groups in peptidoglycan and exopolysaccharide metabolism

The widespread VanZ-1 and VanZ-2 families (Figure 1A) frequently show either gene neighborhood associations or direct domain fusions, with diverse genes involved in both peptidoglycan and other extracellular polysaccharide pathways. Chief among these are the lipid carrier flippase (Pfam: MviN_MATE clan) (Becker et al., 1993; Ruiz, 2015; Ruiz, 2008), the UDP-GlcNAc/MurNAc lipid transferases, which generate the lipid-linked exopolysaccharide precursors (lipid I) (Higashi et al., 1967; Heydanek et al., 1969), and UDP-N-acetylglucosamine (UDP-GlcNAc) biosynthesis enzymes (Mengin-Lecreulx and van Heijenoort, 1993; Mengin-Lecreulx and van Heijenoort, 1996). Despite certain examples of crossover in functional themes, the gene-neighborhood contexts of VanZ-1 and VanZ-2 suggest a metabolic partitioning, with VanZ-2 significantly associating specifically with peptidoglycan-related genes and VanZ-1 significantly linking with biosynthesis genes for other exopolysaccharides (e.g. the outer-membrane-associated lipopolysaccharide) (van Heijenoort, 2007; Figures 5F and 6, Figure 6—figure supplement 2, Figure 6—source data 1). The latter includes WaaL-like lipid A transferase (Ashraf et al., 2022), the polysaccharide chain-length determination domain Wzz (Franco et al., 1998), the Wzc kinase and the ‘extracellular antigen’-regulating ElyC-like domain (Pfam: DUF218) (Rai et al., 2021), and numerous nucleotide-diphosphate sugar biosynthesis and modification enzymes (Suresh Kumar et al., 2007; Figures 5F and 6, Figure 6—figure supplement 2).

The precursors of both peptidoglycan and exopolysaccharides are synthesized in the cytosol, linked to lipid carriers via a diphosphate linkage, e.g., the polyisoprenoid lipid undecaprenol (bactoprenol) (van Heijenoort, 2007; Suresh Kumar et al., 2007; van Heijenoort, 2001; Hong et al., 2023; Rai and Mitchell, 2020). A key step in their maturation is the flipping by the flippase of the lipid-linked intermediates associated with the inner membrane to the outer membrane. These flipped units are then incorporated into the maturing chain (Sham et al., 2014; Kim et al., 2018) by the peptidoglycan glycosyltransferase (GTase) (Di Guilmi et al., 2003) and the chain length determination protein, WzzE/polymerase (WzyE) (Franco et al., 1998; Weckener et al., 2023), in peptidoglycan and other exopolysaccharide maturation pathways, respectively. Based on the precedence of the TelC-catalyzed reaction (Figure 3B), we propose that VanZ-1 and VanZ-2 comparably act on the flipped lipid II head groups bearing the modified sugar intermediates to release the undecaprenol via phosphoester cleavage (Figure 3F). Such activity could modulate the concentration of available peptidoglycan intermediates and allow formation of peptidoglycan with varying thickness and composition during different phases of the life cycle, e.g., sporulation versus vegetative growth in Bacillota. Such a reaction could also possibly modulate exopolysaccharide biosynthesis by comparably acting on their precursors.

The terminal transfer from the lipid carrier of the Gram-negative bacterial O-antigen (as well as other exopolysaccharides attached to the lipid A carrier) has been attributed to the WaaL-like enzymes (Ashraf et al., 2022; Han et al., 2012). However, bacteria generate further lineage-specific polysaccharide decorations, capsule structures, and other exopolysaccharides (e.g. xanthan, enterobacterial common antigen (ECA), alginate, colonic acid), as well as teichoic acids (e.g. wall teichoic acids, WTA) (Imperiali, 2019; Mostowy and Holt, 2018). Notably, the analogs of WaaL, i.e., the terminal transferases for several exopolysaccharides, including ECA and WTA, have to date escaped identification (Rai et al., 2021). Hence, it is possible that, by analogy to the PTDSS1/2 reaction (Figure 3A), the VanZ families act on the lipid carrier-linked sugar head groups to catalyze either the extension of the polysaccharide chains through transesterification or the terminal release of the mature chain through phosphoester cleavage (Figure 3E).

Atypical VanZ domains in uncharacterized modifications of peptidoglycan and the outer membrane

Certain representatives of the two VanZ families also show operonic associations indicative of outer membrane-associated or peptidoglycan modification functions distinct from those described above (Figures 5G and 6, Figure 5—source data 2): (1) An operon in FCB group bacteria couples a VanZ-2 gene with those coding for a SprA secretin-like channel protein (Saiki and Konishi, 2007), a glycine cleavage H (GCVH)-like lipoyl-group carrier protein (Pares et al., 1994), a 2TM protein fused via a proline-rich linker to a C-terminal TonB-C domain (Shultis et al., 2006), and a secreted, second TonB-C domain fused to a Wzi-like outer membrane protein (OMP) superfamily β-barrel (Rahn et al., 2003; Figures 5G and 6). (2) In betaproteobacteria, certain VanZ-1 domains are duplicated with the C-terminal copy being inactive (VanZ-i) and found in an unusual four-gene operon with a thioredoxin-fold [2Fe-2S] ferredoxin (Qi and Grishin, 2005), a possible lipase of the α/β-hydrolase superfamily (Suplatov et al., 2012), and a metallo-β-lactamase (MβL) fold D-Ala-D-Ala cross-linking transpeptidase (Palomeque-Messia et al., 1991; Aravind, 1999). (3) A patescibacterial operon encodes a VanZ-2 domain with an ABC ATPase transporter system, either of two structurally distinct peptidases, namely a papain-like or glycine-glycine peptidase (Novinec and Lenarčič, 2013; Razew et al., 2022), fused to the same membrane-anchored N-terminal coiled-coil region, and a further TM protein containing one or more external Lamin-Tail domains (LTDs) predicted to bind extracellular DNA or polysaccharides (Mans et al., 2004; Figures 5G and 6, Figure 6—figure supplement 2). The associations in the first of the above neighborhoods point to a distinct outer membrane-associated lipid modification, while the other two might be involved in lineage-specific decorations/modifications of peptidoglycan, accompanied by peptide-crosslinking or cleavage activities.

Lipocone domains operating in the outer membrane

Contextual associations, phyletic patterns, and localization predictions support the action of two Lipocone families directly in the outer membrane. Notably, the YfiM-Griddle and YfiM-DUF2279 families are found nearly obligately directly fused or operonically linked to several distinct OMP β-barrels (Wimley, 2003; Fairman et al., 2011; Figures 5H and 6, Figure 6—figure supplement 1). Up to three YfiM-Griddle Lipocones, usually with a cognate OMP β-barrel, might be encoded next to each other in the genome. Additionally, YfiM-Griddle family genes are often encoded in operons with several components of the outer membrane lipid and protein trafficking apparatus, including the LolA-like chaperone (Tokuda and Matsuyama, 2004), the POTRA domain (Sánchez-Pulido et al., 2003; Kim et al., 2007), the channel-blocking Plug domains (Oke et al., 2004), and the TolA-binding TolB-N domain (Carr et al., 2000). Further, these operons might encode a Patatin-like lipase (Ghosh et al., 2006), GT-B family glycosyltransferases (Liu and Mushegian, 2003), and a range of phosphoesterases (e.g. an integral membrane phosphatidic acid phosphatase PAP2 Stukey and Carman, 1997) a lipobox-containing synaptojanin superfamily phosphoesterase (Whisstock et al., 2000), and a secreted R-P phosphatase Burroughs and Aravind, 2023, see Figures 5H and 6, Figure 5—source data 2. In addition to the fusion to the OMP β-barrel, the YfiM-DUF2279 family (Figure 5H) shows operonic associations with a secreted MltG-like peptidoglycan lytic transglycosylase (Höltje et al., 1975; Yunck et al., 2016), a lipid-anchored cytochrome c heme-binding domain (Einsle et al., 1999), a phosphoglucomutase/phosphomannomutase enzyme (Levin et al., 1999), a GNAT acyltransferase (Dong et al., 2007), a diaminopimelate (DAP) epimerase (Antia et al., 1957), and a lysozyme-like enzyme (Koraimann, 2003). In a distinct operon, YfiM-DUF2279 is combined with a GT-A glycosyltransferase domain (Liu and Mushegian, 2003), a further OMP β-barrel, and a secreted PDZ-like domain fused to a ClpP-like serine protease (Muley et al., 2019; Hara et al., 1991; Figure 5H).

The strong linkage to the OMP β-barrel, together with their predicted localization, suggests that these YfiM-Griddle and YfiM-DUF2279 Lipocone domains operate in the outer membrane, potentially in concert with both cytoplasmic carbohydrate biosynthetic modules and periplasmic lipid- and carbohydrate-processing enzymes. As with the inner membrane lipids, they could potentially catalyze modifications of head groups through transesterification and/or linkage/release of outer membrane-associated polysaccharide chains through action on lipid-head group phosphoesters.

Lipocone domains acting on lipids in transit to the outer membrane

The ClaspCone-1 and ClaspCone-3 families lack the hydrophobicity indicative of direct residence in the membrane (Figure 1C); instead, they are predicted to localize to the periplasmic space. In the ClaspCone-1 family, the Lipocone domain is fused at the extreme N-terminus to either a single TM or a 5TM domain predicted to anchor it to the cell membrane. Between this TM element and the Lipocone domain, we detected a previously uncharacterized version of the Tubular lipid binding protein (TULIP) domain (Wong and Levine, 2017; Levine, 2019) or an Ig-like and a Zincin-like metallopeptidase (MPTase) domain (Dhanaraj et al., 1996; Figures 5I and 6). These ClaspCone-1 genes may also show operonic associations with genes encoding a lipase of the SGNH family (Lo et al., 2003) and a membrane-bound O-acyltransferase (MBOAT; Figure 5I, Figure 5—source data 2; Hofmann, 2000). The TULIP domain superfamily has recently been characterized as a lipid-binding domain (Wong and Levine, 2017; Levine, 2019), which in proteobacteria functions in outer membrane lipid transport (Rahlwes et al., 2017; Yeow and Chng, 2022). Thus, we propose that the ClaspCone-1 family is likely to act in the periplasmic space on the head groups of outer-membrane targeted lipids bound to the TULIP or potentially to the Ig-like domains occupying an equivalent position in the domain architecture.

A Lipocone domain catalyzing a predicted lipoprotein lipid linkage reaction

The Skillet-1 Lipocone is strongly coupled in an operon with a downstream gene coding for a protein with an unusual lipobox-like sequence followed by one of several extracellular domains (e.g., concanavalin, β-jelly roll, OB-fold, Ig-like, β-propeller) predicted to bind carbohydrates or other ligands (Kadirvelraj et al., 2008; Flint et al., 2004; Murzin, 1993; Williams and Barclay, 1988; Chen et al., 2011; Figures 5J and 6, Figure 6—figure supplement 1, Figure 5—source data 2). The lipobox-like sequence features a conserved GS motif at its C-terminus instead of the usual GC of the classic lipobox of bacterial lipoproteins (Babu et al., 2006; Figure 5—figure supplement 1). In the canonical lipoprotein processing pathway, a thioether linkage is formed between the sulfhydryl of the cysteine and a diacylglycerol lipid embedded in the inner membrane by the lipoprotein diacylglyceryl transferase (lgt) enzyme, followed by the cleavage of the signal peptide at the GC motif junction by the signal peptidase (Sankaran and Wu, 1994; Tjalsma et al., 1999). Given the serine in place of the cysteine in these lipobox-like sequences, we propose that it undergoes non-canonical lipidation by the associated Skillet-1 Lipocone protein in lieu of lgt. We propose that, comparable to PTDSS1/2, which act on free serine, the Skillet-1 family links the conserved serine from the lipobox-like sequence to a phospholipid (Figure 3A and D).

Lipocone domains in predicted lipid-associated signaling systems

Systems defined by standalone proteins with Lipocone domains

Several representatives of the two VanZ and Skillet-3 families are fused to a diverse array of known or predicted extracellular ligand-binding domains (Figure 5K), where the architecture takes the form of SP + X + TM + Lipocone or Lipocone + TM + X, where ‘X’ is the extracellular ligand-binding domain and SP is a signal peptide. The ligand binding domains include: (i) carbohydrate-binding lectin domains such as jelly-roll, concanavalin-like, NPCBM-like, CBD9-like, and other β-sandwiches (Kadirvelraj et al., 2008; Flint et al., 2004; Notenboom et al., 2001; Rigden, 2005; Boraston et al., 2004) (ii) a lipid-binding helix-grip superfamily domain (Iyer et al., 2001) (iii) those binding other potential ligands (e.g. Ig, OB-fold, YycI-like, DUF498-like, PepSY-like, β-helix, TPR, MORN, and β-propeller repeats Murzin, 1993; Williams and Barclay, 1988; Chen et al., 2011; Boraston et al., 2004; Santelli et al., 2007; Das et al., 2001; Bennett et al., 2013; Cortajarena and Regan, 2006; Figure 5K, Figure 5—source data 2). We interpret these architectures as implying signaling, wherein the binding of the cognate ligand by one of the above domains regulates the catalytic activity of the associated Lipocone domain. Among these, the extracellular domains fused to the Skillet-3 family are particularly notable for their extreme variability (Figure 5K). This suggests diversification under an arms race scenario (also see below) in a biological conflict. Further, the genes coding for the above are sporadically associated with exopolysaccharide metabolism genes (Figure 5—source data 2). Hence, it is conceivable that this signaling is associated with exopolysaccharide variation (e.g., O-antigen phase-variation Seed et al., 2012; Cai et al., 2019), which might play a role in evading bacteriophage attachment.

Additionally, VanZ-1 Lipocone domains are also fused to several known signaling domains confidently predicted to reside in the cytoplasm, including the cyclic nucleotide-binding domain (cNMPBD), phosphopeptide-binding FHA, and DNA-binding RHH and HTH domains (Aravind et al., 2005; Yau, 1994; Durocher et al., 1999; Schreiter and Drennan, 2007; Figure 5K). These associations suggest potential VanZ regulation via a cytoplasmic cyclic nucleotide (sensed by cNMPBD) or, conversely, VanZ acting as an allosteric regulator of a transcriptional program via the HTH or RHH domain. One of the most common yet enigmatic fusions to VanZ is with the integral membrane RDD domain (Stogios and Savchenko, 2020). The role of this domain is unknown; however, our analysis indicates that it contains a conserved intra-membrane binding site oriented towards the cytoplasmic face of the membrane (Nicastro GN, Burroughs AM, Aravind L, manuscript in preparation). The VanZ-RDD fusion is sometimes further fused to other domains (Figure 5K), the most notable being a highly derived but active novel histidine kinase domain (Figure 5K). Together, these associations point to the coupling of lipid modification with a signaling event on the cytoplasmic face of the membrane, which might relate to the dynamic regulation of lipid-carrier-bound exopolysaccharide precursors.

Multi-component associations of the Lipocone proteins in signaling

These systems resemble the above-discussed versions but are encoded by conserved gene neighborhoods that separate the Lipocone and the signaling elements (typically predicted transcription regulators) into distinct genes. Our analysis recovered at least three such systems: (1) A VanZ-1 Lipocone in the recently described HAAS/PadR-HTH two-component systems, which sometimes replace classical Histidine kinase-Receiver two-component systems (Ravi et al., 2024). In these systems, the detection of an extracellular or intramembrane stimulus by a sensor domain releases the PadR-HTH transcription regulator bound to the sensor-fused HAAS domain. Here, VanZ-1 occupies the sensor position (Figure 5L). (2) A Skillet-2 Lipocone is coupled in a core two-gene system to a conserved upstream gene (Figure 5L, Figure 6—figure supplement 1). That gene encodes a single TM protein with either a zinc ribbon (ZnR) fused to a conserved helix or an HTH domain fused to a ClpS-ribosomal L7/L12 domain in its cytoplasmic region (AhYoung et al., 2016). These neighborhoods might also code for an HMG-CoA reductase and GHMP kinase that catalyze successive reactions in the production of phosphomevalonate, a precursor of isoprenoid lipids (Durr and Rudney, 1960; Tchen, 1958). (3) A Skillet-DUF2809 Lipocone protein is operonically coupled with a 6TM protein and a further predicted transcription factor with a wHTH protein. These operons are further elaborated via additional embedded and flanking genes, either coding for components of isoprenoid lipid (e.g. undecaprenol) (Wolff et al., 2003; Guo et al., 2005) or exopolysaccharide (e.g. ECA and related polysaccharides) metabolism (Suresh Kumar et al., 2007; Rai and Mitchell, 2020; Figures 5L and 6, Figure 6—figure supplement 2, Figure 5—source data 2).

The Lipocone domains in these systems are predicted to be active enzymes, which, together with their operonic associations, point to functions involving the modification or transesterification of isoprenoid lipid head groups, sometimes in the context of exopolysaccharide biosynthesis. However, their associations with the intracellular HTH domains suggest that the Lipocone enzymatic activity is potentially coupled with the transcriptional regulation of the production of precursors of the lipids or exopolysaccharides. Given the high variability in the associated genes related to exopolysaccharide/lipopolysaccharide biosynthesis, we anticipate that the associated transcriptional regulation potentially relates to functional categories showing high diversity across bacteria, such as responses to environmental stress, phages, predatory bacteria attacks, or host immune response.

Lipocone domains as effectors in biological conflicts

Lipocone domains in antiviral immunity

The Min-Wnt domains (Figure 1A) that we originally identified were predicted to play a role in biological conflicts with invasive selfish elements, such as viruses (Burroughs and Aravind, 2020). In this work, we better explain their potential mechanism of action. These versions show no fusions to extracellular domains or secretory signals, suggesting that they are deployed from within the bacterial cell (Figure 1C). These Min-Wnts are typically fused to the DUF3892, which displays a fold characterized by a three-stranded meander followed by a helix also seen in the dsRNA-binding domain and the ribosome hibernation factors (HPF) (Burroughs and Aravind, 2016; Ueta et al., 2008; Figure 5M). Hence, we propose that these versions might potentially act to sense virally induced RNAs or modified ribosomes (Burroughs and Aravind, 2020) to trigger a dormancy or suicide response to limit viral infection via the Min-Wnt effector. Specifically, the Min-Wnt might attack peptidoglycan precursors, such as lipid II, prior to their ‘flipping’ to restrict cell wall synthesis (Ruiz, 2015; Akanuma et al., 2016; Kuk et al., 2022) or other such carrier lipids.

One other Min-Wnt domain, N-terminally fused to a three-stranded β-meander, is pervasive in the Bacteroidetes clade. This is operonically coupled with genes encoding a TM-linked run of pentapeptide repeats and two structurally distinct, secreted glycosyl hydrolase enzymes, respectively, containing a TIM barrel domain and a run of β-helix repeats (Figure 5M, Figure 5—source data 2). Furthermore, cyanobacteria show a standalone prok-TelC domain without any secretory signals. These could again act as effectors targeting lipid-linked precursors of peptidoglycan or exopolysaccharides in response to intracellular invaders or stress (Figure 5M). Interestingly, some tailed bacteriophages also code for intracellular Min-Wnt domains, suggesting that they might also be deployed on the virus side in biological conflicts, such as limiting superinfection (Figure 5—source data 2).

Lipocones as toxin domains in polymorphic and allied conflict systems

Polymorphic toxins and related systems, widespread across bacteria and certain archaea, are characterized by a highly variable C-terminal toxin domain (‘toxin tip’) that is preceded by a range of more conserved domains typically required for autoproteolytic processing of the toxin, its packaging and trafficking (e.g. RHS repeats), adhesion and secretion via one of several secretory systems (Zhang et al., 2012; Iyer et al., 2011). The toxin might be delivered via one of the secretory systems into a target cell or else via direct contact between interacting cells. Classical polymorphic toxins are usually involved in kin discrimination and are accompanied by genomically linked cognate immunity proteins that protect against self-intoxication (Zhang et al., 2012; Ruhe et al., 2020). Keeping with the principle of effector sharing between systems involved in distinct types of biological conflicts, we had originally identified a Min-Wnt domain closely related to those described in the above subsection as a toxin tip in polymorphic toxin systems (Burroughs and Aravind, 2020). In the current work, we extend these findings to show that several distinct Lipocone families have been independently recruited as toxin tips of polymorphic toxins and related systems, namely Min-Wnt, prok-SAA, prok-TelC, CapCone-1, CapCone-2, ClaspCone-2, and VanZ-1 (Figures 4 and 5N, Figure 6 Figure 6—figure supplement 3).

Certain CapCone-2 and Min-Wnt toxins from Gram-positive bacteria define some of the simplest of these toxin systems. Here, a standalone Lipocone domain is coupled to a signal peptide or lipobox via a poorly structured linker. These are usually encoded in a two-gene configuration with their cognate immunity protein (Figure 5O). More complex versions present, in addition to adhesion, peptidoglycan-binding, lipid-binding and proteolytic processing domains, multiple hallmarks of delivery through specific secretion systems. These include T4SS (VirD4-binding domain), T6SS (PAAR domain), T7SS (WXG/LXG domain), T9SS, and MuF domains (Zhang et al., 2012; Ruhe et al., 2020; Figure 5P, Figure 5—source data 2). Additionally, we recovered standalone CapCone-1 domains encoded in an operon with a PsbP/MOG1 superfamily domain diagnostic of secretion via the T6SS (Zhang et al., 2012; Alcoforado Diniz and Coulthurst, 2015; Figure 5P). Further, we also found Min-Wnt domains fused to the N-termini of RTX-like β-roll repeats, suggestive of T1SS-mediated export (Satchell, 2011; Figure 5P).

Our analysis also uncovered multiple, previously uncharacterized trafficking/packaging systems associated with different Lipocone polymorphic toxins. Several Min-Wnt and CapCone-1 domains with lipoboxes are fused to an N-terminal Cystatin-like superfamily domain (Kordis and Turk, 2009; Figure 5Q). The same domain is also comparably fused to several other C-terminal toxin domains in related organisms, some of which are also predicted to target lipid head groups: (i) a novel toxin domain we unified with the lipid-targeting Colicin M fold (Chérier et al., 2021) (ii) a lipid-binding START-domain-like helix-grip fold domain (Iyer et al., 2001) (iii) a papain-like fold fatty acyltransferase (Anantharaman and Aravind, 2003) (iv) a domain related to the VanY-like D-Ala-D-Ala carboxypeptidase (Arthur et al., 1992; Figure 5Q, Figure 5—source data 2). In all these cases, the toxins are coupled to a related immunity protein (see below), suggesting that they define a distinct polymorphic toxin system. We propose that this Cystatin-like domain specifies a novel packaging or deployment system upon secretion for the C-terminal toxin domain, analogous to Cystatin domains in functioning with eukaryotic proteases (Turk and Bode, 1991). The prok-TelC family Lipocones are found in distinctive architectures in two poorly characterized, predicted polymorphic toxin systems. In one of them, they are fused to an N-terminal glucan-binding GbpC β-sandwich domain (Sato et al., 1997) and repeats of MucBP-like Ig domains (MacKenzie et al., 2009), which might anchor them to exopolysaccharides (Figure 5Q, Figure 6—figure supplement 3, Figure 5—source data 2). The second variant found in association with T9SS components (Chagnot et al., 2013) shows fusions to one or more copies of a previously undetected TPM domain (Figure 5Q). While the domain has been claimed to be a phosphatase (Wu et al., 2011), our recent analysis indicates that this is unlikely to be the case (Ravi et al., 2024). Instead, we propose that the TPM domain might assist in assembling membrane-linked protein complexes, a role that might be relevant to the trafficking of these toxins (Ravi et al., 2024).

To date, the only experimentally characterized Lipocone domain from polymorphic toxins is of the prok-TelC family that are secreted via T7SS (Whitney et al., 2017; Cao et al., 2016; Figures 5P and 6). Notably, prok-TelC has been shown to be active only outside the cell and not in the cytoplasm (Whitney et al., 2017). As noted above, it attacks lipid II to cleave off the peptide-linked disaccharide pyrophosphate head group from the undecaprenol tail (Figure 3B). Prok-TelC has also been speculated to similarly attack WTA-lipid II linkages (Whitney et al., 2017). These findings provide a template for other Lipocone superfamily effectors in potentially targeting lipid carrier linkages in peptidoglycan and exopolysaccharide intermediates. However, given the diversity within the family (Figure 3F), it is conceivable that they also target other lipids.

Immunity proteins of Lipocone polymorphic toxins indicate periplasmic/intramembrane action

To date, only a single immunity protein has been reported for Lipocone toxins, viz., TipC, which counters prok-TelC toxin in the periplasm (Whitney et al., 2017; Klein et al., 2018; Figures 5P and 6). Here, we uncovered a range of immunity proteins belonging to structurally distinct folds that counter the remaining Lipocone toxins (Figure 5N–Q, Figure 5—figure supplement 2, Figure 5—source data 2). The most widespread of these is a rapidly evolving, membrane-anchored member of the BamE-like superfamily that associates with not only Min-Wnt and CapCone toxins but also other above-mentioned lipid-head-group targeting toxins (e.g. the novel Colicin M-like domain). The BamE-like fold features a core two-helix hairpin followed by a run of three β-strands (Figure 5—figure supplement 2). The classical BamE operates in a pathway for the assembly of OMP β-barrels (Knowles et al., 2011; Hagan and Kahne, 2011), suggesting that these immunity proteins emerged from an ancestral BamE and, like it, function in the periplasm. Additional candidate immunity proteins with more restricted phyletic spreads include (Figure 5—figure supplement 2): (i) a β-jelly-roll fold-containing protein (Flint et al., 2004) (ii) an integral membrane protein with a 4-TM core. These two are observed with Min-Wnt toxins. (iii) A novel domain combining an α-helix with a run of 4 β-strands stabilized by four absolutely conserved cysteine residues. This is coupled to both Min-Wnt and prok-SAA toxins; (iv) a protein with an OB-fold domain (Murzin, 1993) (v) a protein with a β-sandwich related to the eukaryotic centriolar assembly SAS-6 N-terminal domain (Kitagawa et al., 2011). The last two are coupled to CapCone-2 toxins (Figure 5—source data 2). Notably, despite their structural diversity, these immunity proteins are all TM or lipoproteins and, like TipC (Whitney et al., 2017; Klein et al., 2018), are predicted to operate at the membrane or in the periplasm (Figure 5N-Q, Figure 5—source data 2). This suggests that they intercept their cognate Lipocone toxin domain outside cells or in the membrane rather than within the cell.

Lipocone toxins in predator-prey and other interspecific conflicts

In contrast to polymorphic toxins, which are typically deployed in intraspecific conflict between competing strains of the same species, other toxin systems are deployed against more distantly related target cells, such as prey and eukaryotic hosts (Aravind et al., 2012). While some of these closely parallel polymorphic toxins in their domain architecture, they are usually distinguished by the lack of an accompanying immunity protein. The simplest of these systems are secreted Min-Wnt proteins from bacteria and fungi. These present just a standalone Min-Wnt domain or one fused to a novel domain with a half β-barrel wrapping around a helix (Figure 5R, Figure 5—source data 2). These are probably deployed as diffusible toxins that target rival organisms in the environment.

Another architectural theme is defined by Min-Wnt and prok-SAA Lipocones fused to an enigmatic, novel, short C-terminal domain, which is comprised of a long β-hairpin with a characteristic “break” in its central region, causing it to acquire an arch-like appearance (Figure 5S, Figure 5—figure supplement 3). Hence, we refer to this domain as the broken-hairpin. We found the broken-hairpin domain to be fused to a wide array of predicted toxin domains across the bacterial superkingdom. These include effector domains otherwise found in polymorphic toxin and allied systems that target peptidoglycan, carrier lipids and the membrane, such as members of the Colicin M (Chérier et al., 2021), Zeta toxin-kinase (Mutschler et al., 2011), lysozyme (Monzingo et al., 1996), an α/β-hydrolase superfamilies (Suplatov et al., 2012) and nuclease toxins such as members of the HNH, HipA, SNase, and BECR superfamilies (Zhang et al., 2012; Figure 5S, Figure 5—figure supplement 3C). Remarkably, these proteins with the broken-hairpin tend to lack a signal peptide or association with any other secretion system or immunity proteins (Figure 5S, Figure 5—source data 2). Hence, we propose that the broken-hairpin domain itself serves as a trafficking mechanism for the externalization of these toxins in conflicts with rival environmental organisms.

Some predicted secreted Lipocones are found predominantly in predatory bacteria. The first of these are CapCone-2 domains from lineages like Bdellovibrionota, which are encoded in two-gene systems, with the second gene coding for a further secreted effector such as an α/β-hydrolase, Patatin, or acyltransferase or an OMP β-barrel domain (Suplatov et al., 2012; Wimley, 2003; Fairman et al., 2011; Ghosh et al., 2006; Figure 5T, Figure 6—figure supplement 3). Myxobacteria and some other lineages code for secreted prok-SAA domains fused to a N-terminal Zincin-like metallopeptidase domain, and the first bacterial example of the von Willebrand Factor D (vWD) and Ig domains at the C-terminus (Dong et al., 2019; Figure 5T, Figure 5—source data 2). In the recently described predatory Patescibacterial branch of Omnitrophota species, Skillet-clade Lipocone domains are found in gigantic proteins combined with several other domains and TM segments. Domains found in these proteins include polysaccharide biosynthesis enzymes (Suresh Kumar et al., 2007; Rai and Mitchell, 2020), signaling proteins involved in histidine kinase-receiver relays (West and Stock, 2001), peptidases of the MPTase and papain-like superfamily (Novinec and Lenarčič, 2013; Dhanaraj et al., 1996), diverse methylases, and extracellular ligand-binding domains like the peptidoglycan-binding LysM domain (Costa et al., 2006; Figures 5T and 6). Given the concentration of the above systems in predatory bacteria (Figure 5—source data 2), we posit that the above Lipocones might function as toxins targeting prey membranes alongside a battery of effectors targeting other cellular components. In particular, the CapCone-2 systems might play a role in the breaching of outer membranes by Bdellovibrionota. Animal vWD domains are involved in adhesion (Zhang et al., 2018); hence, the bacterial versions might play a similar role in adhering to prey cells, while the MPTase in these proteins potentially releases the associated Prok-SAA toxin through autoproteolysis. Finally, the giant proteins from the Patescibacteria are likely to combine signaling prey presence with overcoming prey defenses and breaching prey membranes.

Certain prok-TelC proteins are observed as part of several distinctive systems that could be involved in as-yet-undiscovered predatory interactions or in targeting environmental competitors. One such, defined by large proteins from spore-forming Bacillota, combines a diversifying set of extracellular ligand-binding domains (e.g., Ig-like, Cell-wall-binding β-hairpins and β-propellers Williams and Barclay, 1988; Chen et al., 2011; Hermoso et al., 2003) with a two-enzyme core formed by a prok-TelC and a N-acetylglucosamine (GlcNAc)–1-phosphodiester alpha-N-acetylglucosaminidase (NAGPA). NAGPA catalyzes phosphoric-diester hydrolysis to release phosphodiester-linked sugars (Figures 5U and 6, Figure 6—figure supplement 3; Das et al., 2013). Some of these proteins feature an additional NlpC/p60 superfamily peptidase domain predicted to target peptidoglycan (Anantharaman and Aravind, 2003). The recombinational diversity of ligand-binding domains in this system, even among closely related Bacillota species, supports a possible arms race and involvement in a biological conflict. Other TelC domains in some Bacillota, Actinomycetota, and fungi are fused to peptidoglycan-binding domains (PGBD) (Dideberg et al., 1982) and an Rv2525c-like TIM-barrel (Bellinzoni et al., 2014; Figure 5U, Figure 6—figure supplement 3). In Actinomycetota, this protein is further combined in operons with either of two mutually exclusive genes coding for rapidly evolving proteins (Figure 5U): (i) a secreted protein containing a pair of Ig domains (Hermoso et al., 2003) (ii) a 3-TM protein (3TM-CCDN) with two conserved cysteines, an aspartate and asparagine residues predicted to be located between the TM segments outside the cell. This version is further coupled to a gene for a secreted VanY superfamily peptidase (Arthur et al., 1992; Figure 5U, Figure 5—source data 2). Common to these contexts are rapidly evolving and variable domains on the one hand and peptidoglycan/exopolysaccharide binding or degrading domains on the other. Hence, we interpret these as potential conflict systems that engage the cell wall and target it and associated membranes in rival bacteria.

Lipocone domains in resistance to antimicrobial agents

VanZ-1 proteins (Figure 1A) were initially identified as encoded by a gene linked to that coding for the VanY D-alanyl-D-alanine carboxypeptidase involved in resistance to glycopeptide antibiotics like vancomycin and teicoplanin (Arthur et al., 1995; Wright et al., 1992; Arthur et al., 1998; Arthur et al., 1994; Figure 6). These antibiotics bind the terminal D-Ala-D-Ala in the peptide moiety of peptidoglycan, preventing the transpeptidase cross-linking reaction necessary for its maturation. Upon detection of these antibiotics, enzymes encoded by the core vancomycin resistance operon re-engineer the exported peptidoglycan by inserting a D-Ala-D-Lac in place of the D-Ala-D-Ala linkage, precluding antibiotic binding (Stogios and Savchenko, 2020). The VanY peptidase, while not strictly required for antibiotic resistance, acts as an accessory to this system by cleaving any remaining D-Ala-D-Ala linkages generated via the canonical pathway (Stogios and Savchenko, 2020; Arthur et al., 1998). However, the role of VanZ in this system has so far remained unknown. While only a small fraction of the VanZ-1 genes are found in these antibiotic resistance contexts (Figure 5—source data 2), interestingly, other Lipocone genes, namely those of the VanZ-2 and the Skillet families, might also be linked to VanY in lieu of VanZ-1. Furthermore, VanY might be replaced by a structurally unrelated secreted D-Ala-D-Ala carboxypeptidase of the metallo-beta-lactamase fold (Palomeque-Messia et al., 1991) in operonic contexts with VanZ-1 (Figure 5V). Hence, given our above prediction regarding VanZ acting in peptidoglycan and/or exopolysaccharide metabolism, VanZ-1 and the Lipocones displacing it might indeed play an accessory role with VanY at the membrane (Wright et al., 1992; Arthur et al., 1998) in antibiotic resistance. We posit that, in these contexts, it likely acts on the head group of Lipid II to recycle canonical peptidoglycan intermediates for their accelerated or more thorough replacement with the resistant versions (Figure 3G).

We also identified a conserved five-gene operon featuring a YfiM-1 family Lipocone that might play a role in resistance to antibacterial agents (Figure 5W, Figure 6—figure supplement 1). Other than YfiM-1, this operon contains genes for: (i) a thioredoxin domain protein Qi and Grishin, 2005; (ii) A DTW clade RNA modifying enzyme of the SPOUT superfamily Meyer et al., 2016; Burroughs and Aravind, 2014; (iii) a protein with acyl-CoA ligase, GNAT superfamily N-acetyltransferase and ATP-grasp domains Dong et al., 2007; Fraser et al., 2002; Iyer et al., 2009; (iv) a PssA-like phosphatidylserine synthetase of the HKD superfamily (Raetz and Kennedy, 1974; Figure 5W, Figure 5—source data 2). Of these enzymes, the phosphatidylserine synthetase is predicted to act in its usual capacity to generate a lipid with a serine head group (Raetz and Kennedy, 1974). We propose that this would then function as a substrate for the YfiM-1 Lipocone domain, which might exchange the serine for another moiety via a reaction paralleling PTDSS1/2 (Figure 3A). This moiety could then be modified by aminoacylation, further acylation, and a redox modification by the third protein listed above, together with the thioredoxin. Indeed, such peptide modifications of lipid head groups by lysine, alanine, or arginine aminoacylation catalyzed by derived tRNA synthetases fused to GNATs have been shown to be a key resistance mechanism against breaching of the membrane by antibacterial peptides (Fields and Roy, 2018; Hancock, 1997). Hence, we predict the modifications catalyzed by this system might play a comparable role. The presence of a tRNA-modifying DTW domain suggests that in parallel to the tRNA synthetases, the GNAT in this system might use a tRNA-linked acyl group as a substrate, as seen in peptidoglycan biosynthesis (Benson et al., 2002; Schneider et al., 2004).

Eukaryotic recruitments of the Lipocone superfamily

Lipocone domains have been transferred on several occasions from bacteria to eukaryotes (Figure 4, Figure 1—figure supplement 1). While there is predicted functional overlap with the above-described, predominantly bacterial versions, we discuss these separately as the inferred biological contexts of their deployment are often distinct from the above.

Plant YfiM-1 and eukaryotic VanZ-2 proteins

A conserved YfiM-1 family protein typified by the Arabidopsis AT1G15900 was acquired from the bacteroidetes lineage of bacteria at the base of the plant lineage prior to the chlorophyte-streptophyte (including land plants) split and is predicted to be catalytically active (Figure 1—figure supplement 2, Figure 5—source data 2). In Arabidopsis, this gene is widely expressed across different tissue types, developmental stages, and other tested conditions (Schmid et al., 2003; Berardini et al., 2015). Given the above-predicted roles for bacterial YfiM-1 proteins, it is conceivable that the plant version plays a comparable role in the metabolism of a conserved plant-specific lipid. In a similar vein, a distinct clade of standalone VanZ-2 domains typified by the Saccharomyces cerevisiae YJR112W-A was acquired early in the fungal lineage. A similar transfer is also seen in the SAR clade of eukaryotes (Figure 1—figure supplement 1). Since these eukaryotes lack peptidoglycan and other bacterial-type isoprenoid lipid-borne exopolysaccharide intermediates, we suggest that this version was recruited for modifications of a fungus-specific lipid (e.g., highly oxygenated isoprenoid lipids) (Savidov et al., 2018).

The Met-TelC proteins

The Met-TelC clade is comprised of versions of the TelC family with a reconfigured active site transferred from bacteria to Metazoa prior to the divergence of the cnidarians, and most members are predicted to be catalytically inactive (Figure 2). In cnidarians and arthropods, the Met-TelC domain is found in a secreted protein fused to C-terminal adhesion-related vWA (Lee et al., 1995) and Ig domains, followed by a TM helix (Figure 5X, Figure 5—source data 2). The chordate version, typified by human PGLYRP2 (Zhang et al., 2005), is also secreted and is fused to a C-terminal amidase targeting the N-acetylmuramoyl-L-alanine linkage (Figure 5X, Figure 5—source data 2). PGLYRP2 is a key innate immunity factor against bacterial pathogens that degrade sugar-peptide linkages in peptidoglycan via the Amidase domain (Lee et al., 2012; Dziarski and Gupta, 2010; Dziarski and Gupta, 2006b). As most Met-TelC proteins lack the active site residues but are modeled to retain the substrate-binding pocket, we propose that they participate in anti-bacterial immunity as a Pathogen-Associated Molecular Pattern (PAMP) receptor (Jones and Dangl, 2006). Specifically, they could recognize polyisoprenoid pyrophosphate-linkage-containing lipid intermediates of bacterial cell-surface molecules like peptidoglycan or exopolysaccharides.

Eukaryotic Wnt proteins

Wnt family Lipocones were transferred on multiple occasions to eukaryotes. The best-known of these are Met-Wnt proteins, which were acquired from bacteria at the base of Metazoa after they had separated from their closest sister group, the choanoflagellates. These lost the ancestral active site residues and function as well-studied secreted signaling molecules and will not be detailed further in this work (for review, see Richards and Degnan, 2009; Holzem et al., 2024). Independent of the Met-Wnt proteins, catalytically active, secreted versions closely related to the bacterial Min-Wnt proteins were transferred to fungi and, within Metazoa, to the rotifers and the hemichordate acorn worm Saccoglossus kowalevskii, where they are lineage-specifically expanded (Figure 1—figure supplement 1, Figure 5—source data 2). These versions are primarily standalone versions of the Min-Wnt domain, lacking the large inserts typical of the Met-Wnt proteins (Figure 1A). We predict that these eukaryotic Min-Wnt proteins retain their ancestral toxin role and might participate in anti-bacterial immunity.

Met-SAA proteins

Met-SAA proteins (Figure 1A) were acquired from bacteria prior to the divergence of the cnidarians from the rest of Metazoa. However, unlike the Met-Wnt and Met-TelC proteins, they often conserve the ancestral active site residues, indicating that they are usually enzymatically active (Figure 3). Human SAA has been recognized as a key immune marker that dramatically increases in blood during the Acute Phase Response (Morrow et al., 1981). It has been reported to bind the E. coli outer membrane protein OmpA (Hari-Dass et al., 2005) and claimed to function as an opsonin in innate immunity (Shah et al., 2006). Like Met-TelC, but in contrast to Met-Wnts, Met-SAAs appear to have been lost or pseudogenized in several animal lineages (Sack et al., 1989; Uhlar et al., 1994; Sun and Ye, 2016; Figure 3). This is consistent with an arms race scenario in immunity and the development of pathogen resistance against the Met-SAAs, leading to loss. Keeping with an immune role for the Met-SAAs, we propose a catalytic function for the active versions in severing lipid head groups of outer-membrane lipids or of isoprenoid lipid carrier intermediates. Such action could also generate PAMPs that could explain the activation of neutrophil- and macrophage-based immunity by SAA (Shah et al., 2006). Pertinent to these observations, diverse OMP β-barrels have been linked to the translocation of polymorphic toxin domains across the outer membrane of target cells (Aoki et al., 2008; Virtanen et al., 2019; Ruhe et al., 2017). Given this and the origin of Met-SAA from bacterial polymorphic toxin-related systems (Figure 4), its interaction with OmpA might help it cross over into the periplasmic space and act on maturing peptidoglycan or teichoic acid intermediates.

SAA was first reported as a component of secondary amyloid deposits (Levin et al., 1972), and its capacity to form amyloid fibrils upon protease cleavage was theorized as a potential PAMP activating the immune response (Sack, 2018). Indeed, bacteria produce their own secreted amyloids, such as Curli and Fap, believed to contribute to biofilm formation (Blanco et al., 2012; Rouse et al., 2018), and might be PAMPs recognized by animal immune systems (Tükel et al., 2009). Furthermore, other animal amyloids, such as the β-amyloid, have been proposed to play a role as physical barriers in immunity against bacteria (Prosswimmer et al., 2024). Thus, amyloid formation by protease cleavage (including potentially by bacterial proteases) may represent a second line of defense mediated by Met-SAA proteins.

Discussion

Early evolution of the lipocone superfamily

No single well-defined Lipocone clade is universally conserved across the three superkingdoms of Life (Figure 4, Figure 1—figure supplement 1, Figure 1—figure supplement 5). However, the VanZ and Wok clades are both found across all major bacterial phyla (notwithstanding sporadic losses in certain lineages) and in some archaeal lineages (Figure 1—figure supplement 1). At the same time, the cpCone clade is found across most major archaeal lineages and is nearly universally conserved in the eukaryotes (absent in Ascomycota and some choanoflagellates) (Figure 1—figure supplement 1). Notably, the cpCone and Wok clades tend to group together in the profile-profile similarity network (Figure 1B). These observations suggest that at least a single version of the Lipocone superfamily was likely present in the Last Universal Common Ancestor (LUCA). The phyletic patterns suggest that the LUCA Lipocone gave rise to the VanZ/Wok precursor in the bacterial lineage on the one hand and the cpCONE clade via a circular permutation event in the archaeo-eukaryotic lineage on the other (Figure 4). Based on the features of these deep-branching clades, the LUCA version is inferred to feature a hydrophobic domain with a 4TM helix core, with the active site facing the outer leaf of the lipid bilayer (Figure 1C). Given that extant versions operate both on classic phospholipids and isoprenoid lipids, it is difficult to infer which of these might have been substrates for the LUCA version. It is not impossible that this early version had a generic specificity that became specialized in the descendant clades.

Subsequent diversification of the Lipocone domain

The early diversification of the Lipocone domain appears to have had different drivers in the two prokaryotic superkingdoms. The presence of an extensive repertoire of exopolysaccharides in the cell wall (peptidoglycan, teichoic acids), cell surface (e.g., ECA), and outer membrane (e.g., lipopolysaccharide), synthesized via isoprenoid lipid-linked intermediates, like lipid-II, was the primary driver in the bacterial superkingdom (Egan et al., 2020). Here, this diversification yielded four monophyletic groups: the VanZs, Wok, YfiM, and Skillet (Figure 4). The deeper VanZ and Wok branches, which were likely recruited first for lipid-II-related functions, were probably the predecessors of the more restricted bacterial families with specialized functions. For instance, the emergence of the outer membrane in certain bacteria was potentially coupled with the origin of the YfiM-like clade (Figure 4). Similarly, our predictions suggest that within these clades, further diversification accompanied the acquisition of specialized functional roles in antibiotic resistance, secondary sensor roles in single and multicomponent signaling, and lipoprotein processing. The interoperability of Lipocone domains on lipid carriers shared across different biosynthetic pathways (see above, Figure 3, Figure 6—figure supplement 1, Figure 6—figure supplement 2) appears to have been a key factor leading to this versatility.

In the ancestral archaeo-eukaryotic lineage, the absence of peptidoglycan and an apparently lower diversity of structures with exopolysaccharides was reflected in the lesser diversification of the Lipocone clades (Figure 4). There are open questions regarding the biochemical functions of the primary archaeo-eukaryotic Lipocone clade, the cpCONE. Although the eukaryotic cpCone PTDSS1/2 family has been shown to swap serine for ethanolamine or choline in lipid head groups (Stone and Vance, 1999; Vance, 2018), their archaeal counterparts remain uncharacterized. Archaea have their own lipid with a serine in the head group (archaeophosphatidyserine), but to date, its synthesis has been shown to depend on a patchwork of different CDP-alcohol phosphatidyltransferase enzymes (CaPs) in different archaeal species (Koga and Morii, 2005; Koga and Morii, 2007; Daiyasu et al., 2005). While the CaPs are also integral membrane enzymes with a 6TM helix core, catalyzing comparable reactions as the Lipocones on lipid head groups in archaea and eukaryotes (Daiyasu et al., 2005), they are evolutionarily unrelated. Nevertheless, we suggest that the archaeal cpCones, like their eukaryotic counterparts, could contribute to distinct, as yet uncharacterized, pathways for the generation of cell membrane phospholipids like archaeophosphatidylserine or those with other head groups.

Emergence of diffusible versions of the Lipocone domain and their repeated recruitment in biological conflicts

One of the remarkable aspects of the Lipocone superfamily is the loss of ancestral hydrophobicity in several families (Figure 1C), transforming them from integral membrane proteins to diffusible domains. While unexpected, such a transition in integral membrane enzymes acting on lipid substrates is not unprecedented. The PAP2 superfamily of integral membrane enzymes (e.g., diacylglycerol diphosphate phosphatase) (Stukey and Carman, 1997; Carman and Han, 2006) also contains several soluble versions (Neuwald, 1997) that appear to have emerged from an integral membrane ancestor (AMB and LA, unpublished observations). Most of the soluble Lipocone domains retain their active site conservation (Figure 2) and, at least in one experimentally characterized case, catalyze a comparable reaction as the TM version (Whitney et al., 2017; Figure 3B). The weight of the evidence presented here, including the profile-profile similarity network (Figure 1B), phyletic patterns (Figure 1—figure supplement 1), functional contexts (Figures 5–6), and the broadly shared structural features (Figure 1A, Figure 1—figure supplement 2, Figure 1—figure supplement 4), suggests that the loss of hydrophobicity occurred on a single occasion in the Lipocone superfamily, followed by diversification of these diffusible versions.

Our analysis of the diffusible Lipocone families reveals repeated recruitment as toxins/effectors in anti-viral and polymorphic toxin and allied systems (Zhang et al., 2012), suggesting that their diversification was driven by the arms races arising from the biological conflicts where they are deployed. Recruitment of a representative of the VanZ-1 family as a polymorphic toxin on rare occasions (Figures 5N and 6) suggests a possible evolutionary pathway for their recruitment as toxins: the effector version of Lipocones attacking lipids in competing bacteria likely emerged from an ancestral version that catalyzed endogenous lipid-head-group modifications on the same lipids in metabolic pathways. Once versions with reduced hydrophobicity emerged, they could be deployed as diffusible effectors that were shared across extracellular and intracellular conflict systems, a trend previously recognized in many other effector domains (Aravind et al., 2022).

Repeated acquisition of Lipocones of bacterial origin by eukaryotes

Unlike bacteria, eukaryotes as a whole do not possess a rich repertoire of Lipocone domains. The PTDSS1/2 family, vertically inherited from the archaeal progenitor, is the only version that can be inferred as being present in the Last Eukaryotic Common Ancestor (Figure 4). However, distinct Lipocone families of ultimately bacterial provenance were acquired early and fixed in certain eukaryotic lineages: (i) YfiM-1 in the plant lineage; (ii) the fungal VanZ-2 domains typified by the Saccharomyces cerevisiae YJR112W-A; (iii) Met-Wnt (discussed further below) (Figure 1—figure supplement 1). The early fixation of these versions in the eukaryotic lineages possessing them suggests that they were recruited for definitive ‘housekeeping’ or developmental roles in the respective lineages. Beyond these, the fungal and metazoan lineages show more sporadically distributed versions, which have all been acquired from bacterial secreted-toxin or antiviral systems: (i) Min-Wnt independently in fungi and certain Metazoa; (ii) SAA; (iii) TelC; the latter two are absent in the basal-most metazoans, the sponges, but are present in Cnidaria, suggesting a relatively early acquisition (Figure 4). The weight of the evidence suggests that they have retained certain aspects of the ancestral bacterial effector function for anti-pathogen immunity in eukaryotes. This is consistent with both their episodic loss and lineage-specific expansion, the tendency to show rapid sequence divergence and, in the Met-TelC family, loss of catalytic activity (Figure 2, Figure 1—figure supplement 1, Figure 5—source data 2).

This independent acquisition of at least three distinct Lipocone families in metazoan immunity from polymorphic and allied effector systems of prokaryotes points to a persistent evolutionary trend. Notably, the Lipocone domains participating in animal immunity have been drawn from secreted effectors rather than the intracellular versions (bacterial intracellular Min-Wnts) predicted to participate in bacterial anti-selfish element immunity. More generally, this adds to a growing list of components drawn from secreted effector systems of prokaryotes in eukaryotic immune systems (Zhang et al., 2012; Aravind et al., 2012; Aravind et al., 2024). For example, this closely parallels another structurally unrelated effector domain, the Zn-dependent deaminase (e.g., metazoan AID/APOBEC deaminases) (Krishnan et al., 2018). Hence, these observations add further support to our hypothesis that the extensive expansion of effectors in diverse prokaryotic inter-organismal conflict systems served as a reservoir from which eukaryotic immune systems repeatedly acquired components (Aravind et al., 2012; Aravind et al., 2024). We propose that symbiotic associations between the early animals and bacteria resulted in potential interactions via secreted effectors of the latter that aided the former against antagonistic bacteria. This probably led to their eventual acquisition by animals and incorporation into their immune processes.

Origin of Wnt as a signaling molecule

Earlier considerations on the evolution of Wnt signaling indicated that it emerged at the base of the metazoan lineage and incorporated a wide range of components of different origins (e.g., the HMG domain transcription factor TCF/LEF, the HEAT repeat protein β-catenin and the 7TM receptor Frizzled) (Richards and Degnan, 2009). However, the provenance of Met-Wnt itself had been mysterious and was seen as a possible example of a metazoan innovation (Holzem et al., 2024). While the Met-Wnt domains possess peculiar structural elaborations (Janda et al., 2012), its conserved core is a Lipocone domain (Figure 1A). We establish that the progenitor of Met-Wnt emerged as part of the radiation of Lipocone domains in bacteria as effectors deployed in both intracellular and inter-organismal conflict – the Min-Wnt proteins.

Whereas the Min-Wnt proteins are predicted to be secreted toxins, the Met-Wnts underwent an ancestral inactivation through loss of the catalytic residues (Figure 2). However, they retained their ancient involvement in cell-cell interactions as secreted agents. The Met-Wnt residues recognized as essential for the receptor (Frizzled) binding, including the absolutely conserved palmitoleoylated serine residue, are found in the aforementioned Metazoa-specific hairpins and loops (Janda et al., 2012; Zhong et al., 2021). However, despite their inactivation, the Met-Wnts retain the ancestral substrate-binding pocket (Figure 1A, Figure 1—figure supplement 2). This raises the possibility that they might be involved in as-yet unexplored interactions with ligands such as lipids.

Our tracing of the provenance of Wnt back to an effector in secreted bacterial toxin systems adds it to a growing list of components in metazoan signaling networks that have been acquired from such systems. For instance, this is also the case with components of the other key metazoan signaling pathway, Hedgehog (Zhang et al., 2011). Here, the Hedgehog protein itself contains an autoproteolytic HINT peptidase domain that was likely drawn from a structurally and functionally cognate domain observed in polymorphic toxin systems (Zhang et al., 2012; Zhang et al., 2011). Further, an intracellular component of the same signaling pathway, Suppressor of Fused (SuFu), was derived from a common immunity protein found in polymorphic toxin systems (Zhang et al., 2011). Similarly, the Teneurin/Odd Oz proteins mediating signaling in cell migration, neuronal pathfinding, and fasciculation in Metazoa descended from a polymorphic toxin protein with a C-terminal HNH endonuclease toxin tip (Zhang et al., 2012). In a similar vein, the immunity protein of certain CapCone toxins identified in this study might have given rise to the β-sandwich domain in the eukaryotic centriolar assembly factor SAS-6. These observations suggest that, in addition to immune system components, interactions with symbiotic bacteria also potentially furnished the progenitors of components of eukaryotic signaling and cytoskeletal networks that were central to the emergence of Metazoa as a clade of multicellular eukaryotes (Kaur et al., 2020; Kaur et al., 2021).

Conclusions

Using sensitive sequence and structure analysis, we unify a large, hitherto unrecognized superfamily of enzymatic domains, the Lipocone. By combining analysis of the active site and the structure of the Lipocone domain with contextual information from conserved gene-neighborhoods and domain architectures, we present evidence that members of this superfamily target phosphate linkages in head groups of both classical phospholipids and polyisoprenoid lipids. Specifically, they catalyze reactions such as head group exchange or severing of the head group-diphosphate linkage from the polyisoprenol. We present evidence that these activities have been recruited in a wide range of biochemical contexts, including cell membrane lipid modification, metabolism of peptidoglycan and exopolysaccharide lipid-carrier linked intermediates, lipoprotein modifications, bacterial outer membrane modification, sensing of membrane-associated signals, effector activity in antiviral and inter-organismal conflicts, and resistance to antimicrobials. Furthermore, catalytically inactive versions like Met-Wnt have been recruited for signaling roles in Metazoa. We predict the catalytic activity and potential biochemical pathways of numerous representatives for the first time, including some proteins that have remained enigmatic for over two decades, like VanZ.

We identify three notable trends in Lipocone evolution. First, although we reconstruct the ancestral member of the superfamily as being a 4TM integral membrane domain, a large monophyletic subset underwent a dramatic loss of hydrophobicity, transforming them into diffusible versions, including the Wnts and the SAAs (Figure 1C). Second, the superfamily expanded in two major functional niches in bacteria, namely peptidoglycan/exopolysaccharide metabolism and effector domains of both secreted toxins and immune systems (Figure 4). Finally, members of the Lipocone superfamily were acquired on multiple occasions from bacteria by Metazoan and were reused in new functional contexts as signaling messengers and immune factors (Figure 4).

Importantly, our predictions in this regard underscore that much remains unexplored in terms of lineage-specific cell wall and membrane metabolism in prokaryotes. We present several testable biochemical, functional hypotheses for the many poorly understood branches of the superfamily, several of which are being recognized as enzymatic for the first time here. We hope this will also open new avenues of research to fill key gaps in our understanding of lipid metabolism.

Methods

Sequence analysis

Sequence similarity searches were performed using PSI-BLAST (Altschul et al., 1997) and JackHMMER (Johnson et al., 2010) against the NCBI non-redundant protein database (nr) (Sayers et al., 2022) or a version clustered down to 50% sequence identity (nr50). The searches were initiated using the previously identified prokaryotic Wnt (Burroughs and Aravind, 2020), with multiple rounds of searches conducted, each using seeds collected from the preceding searches (Figure 1—figure supplement 5 file 5). Clusters based on sequence similarity (percentage identity or bit-score) were generated using MMseqs (Hauser et al., 2016). The clustering parameters were adjusted according to specific goals, enabling redundancy removal, the definition of homologous groups, and the creation of new profiles. Multiple sequence alignments (MSA) were generated using the MAFFT program (Katoh and Standley, 2013) with the local-pair algorithm, combined with the parameters –maxiterate 3000, –op 1.5, and –ep 0.2, and were manually refined based on structural superpositions and profile-profile comparisons.

Sequence similarity network analysis

The HHalign program (Steinegger et al., 2019) was used to perform profile-profile comparisons, with the resulting p-value and e-value scores serving as edges for constructing a superfamily relationship network. This was then analyzed using the Leiden community finding algorithm (Traag et al., 2019) to detect sub-networks. Network analysis and visualization were performed using the R igraph (Csardi and Nepusz, 2006) or Python networkX libraries (Hagberg et al., 2008).

Comparative genomics, domain identification, and phylogenetic analysis

Genomic neighborhoods were obtained from genomes available in the NCBI Genome database (Sayers et al., 2022) using in-house scripts written in Perl and Python. Conservation analysis of these genomic neighborhoods was performed by clustering the protein products of neighboring genes. Domain identification was conducted using a collection of HMMs and PSSMs maintained by the Aravind lab, along with HMMs from the Pfam database (Finn et al., 2016), utilizing the RPSBLAST (Schäffer et al., 1999) and HMMSCAN (Eddy, 2011) programs (Figure 1—figure supplement 1—l file 5). To further refine detection, domain identification was extended through remote homology analysis using the HHpred (Söding et al., 2005) program, against profiles built from the Pfam (Finn et al., 2016) and PDB70 (Berman et al., 2007) databases. Phylogenetic analyses were performed using FastTree (Price et al., 2010) and iqTREE2 (Minh et al., 2020). Experimental functional data for characterized members of the superfamily were collected with the assistance of the ChatGPT language model (https://chat.openai.com). Structural comparisons, along with shared genomic associations, were used to further refine the interrelationships within and between the groups of the superfamily.

Families with broader presence across multiple major lineages (‘phyla’) and deeper conservation within each of those lineages were inferred to be more ancient. In contrast, those with a more limited phyletic spread and/or limited depth of occurrence within each major lineage were likely later derivations (Figure 4, Figure 1—figure supplement 1). We formalized this inference by calculating a phyletic metric for the Lipocone clades (Figure 1—figure supplement 1) comprised of both the phyletic spread and depth. The phyletic spread Si of the ith Lipocone clade was computed thus:Si=miM,

Where mi is the number of lineages with at least one representative of the Lipocone clade Si, and M is the total number of lineages examined. The phyletic depth Di of the ith Lipocone clade was computed as a weighted average of its occurrence within each lineage in the form of the mediant:Di=∑j=1Mnj∑j=1MNj,

where nj is the number of species in lineage j with a Lipocone domain of the ith Lipocone clade and Nj is the total number of species sampled in lineage j. Si and Di are plotted as a bar graph with Si as its width and Di its height.

Contextual network construction

Each domain architecture and conserved gene neighborhood was decomposed into its constituent domains. These domains were then labeled for their biochemical function and stored as a YAML file (Figure 6—source data 2). The contextual connections were then rendered as a graph with the domains as its nodes and the adjacency relationships as its edges. Cliques containing a given Lipocone domain were detected in this graph and merged to constitute their respective dense subgraphs. These subgraphs were then examined for the statistically significant prevalence of particular labeled functions using the Fisher exact test. Network analysis was performed using the functions of the R igraph or Python networkX libraries.

Structure analysis

Protein structures were modeled using Alphafold3 (Abramson et al., 2024), with visualization and manipulation performed using either MOL* (Sehnal et al., 2021) or PyMOL. Structural similarity searches were conducted using the DALIlite (Holm, 2019) and FOLDSEEK (van Kempen et al., 2024) programs. DALIlite was also used to generate structural alignments.

Hydrophobicity analysis

To create the membrane propensity plots, for each protein Pi in a given family, we compute the average TM-propensity of its amino acids using the TM tendency scale (Zhao and London, 2006). This score Hi for Pi is calculated as:Hi=1n∑j=1nhj

where hj is the TM tendency of the j-th amino acid in the protein Pi, and n is its total length in amino acids (Figure 1—source data 1). The Kruskal–Wallis nonparametric test was applied to assess whether TM propensity scores differed across the 30 groups. As the Kruskal–Wallis test indicated a significant difference (p<0.05), we performed post-hoc pairwise comparisons using Dunn’s test with Bonferroni correction to control for multiple testing. Group-wise visualizations were presented using critical difference diagrams, where groups not connected by horizontal bars are significantly different (adjusted p<0.05) (Figure 1—figure supplement 3).

Funding Information

This paper was supported by the following grants:

http://dx.doi.org/10.13039/100000092 Division of Intramural Research at the National Library of Medicine (NLM) to A Maxwell Burroughs, Gianlucca G Nicastro, L Aravind.

http://dx.doi.org/10.13039/100000002 National Institutes of Health to A Maxwell Burroughs, Gianlucca G Nicastro, L Aravind.

http://dx.doi.org/10.13039/100006229 Oak Ridge Institute for Science and Education to Gianlucca G Nicastro.

Acknowledgements

This research was supported by the Division of Intramural Research at the National Library of Medicine (NLM), National Institutes of Health (NIH). This research was supported in part by an appointment to the NLM Research Participation Program administered by the Oak Ridge Institute for Science and Education (ORISE) through an interagency agreement between the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) and the NLM.

Additional information

Competing interests

Author contributions

Additional files

MDAR checklist

Data availability

Figure 1—source data 1, Figure 5—source data 1 and 2, Figure 6—source data 1 and Figure 6—source data 2 contain the data used to generate the figures.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.108061.2.sa0

eLife Assessment

Bayer-Santos Ethel Reviewing Editor The University of Texas at Austin United States

Keywords: Compelling
Keywords: Fundamental

This fundamental study presents a compelling and comprehensive analysis of the newly defined Lipocone superfamily, offering unprecedented insights into the evolutionary origins of Wnt proteins. The authors provide evidence that this superfamily evolved from membrane proteins. The work is exemplary in its use of sequence analysis and structural modeling and will be of broad interest to researchers studying protein evolution and enzymology.

[Editors' note: this paper was reviewed by Review Commons.]

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.108061.2.sa1

Reviewer #1 (Public review):

Reviewer

Summary:

In this study titled 'The Lipocone Superfamily: A Unifying Theme In Metabolism Of Lipids, Peptidoglycan, And Exopolysaccharides, Inter-Organismal Conflicts And Immunity' from L. Aravind's group, the authors report the identification of a novel domain superfamily termed "Lipocone" superfamily. This superfamily unifies Wnt protein with a spectrum of domains from about 30 families, including those from phosphatidylserine synthases (PTDSS1/2), TelC toxin, VanZ proteins, and the animal Serum Amyloid A (SAA). The authors provide evidence that this superfamily originated as membrane proteins, with few (including Wnt and SAA) evolving into soluble domains. The authors also provide contextual evidence for the Lipocone members recruited as effectors in biological conflicts in both prokaryotes and eukaryotes. Importantly, to my knowledge, this study is the first to decipher the origins of Wnt signaling (emerging from a membrane protein context) and provide novel insights into immunity.

- The study is well-executed and provides many interesting leads for further experimental studies, which makes it very important. One of the significant hypotheses in this context is metazoan Wnt Lipocone domain interactions with lipids, which remain to be explored.

- The manuscript is generally navigable for interesting reading despite being content-rich.

- Overall, the figures are easy to follow.

Significance:

This study not only provides a plausible solution to the origins of metazoan Wnt signaling but also hypothesizes, based on retained ancestral substrate binding pocket, potential lipid interactions for lipocone wnt domains. The study also predicts novel enzymatic roles for many poorly characterized proteins that are involved in immunity across lineages/superkingdoms. This work is likely to inspire numerous experimental studies attempting to verify the hypotheses described in the study.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.108061.2.sa2

Reviewer #2 (Public review):

Reviewer

Summary:

This is a remarkable study, one of a kind. The authors trace the entire huge superfamily containing Wnt proteins which origins remained obscure before this work. Even more amazingly, they show that Wnts originated from transmembrane enzymes. The work is masterfully executed and presented. The conclusions are strongly supported by multiple lines of evidence. Illustrations are beautifully crafted. This is an exemplary work of how modern sequence and structure analysis methods should be used to gain unprecedented insights into protein evolution and origins.

Significance:

Wnts are essential in animal development and their studies attracted significant attention. Therefore, this work is of high importance. Moreover, the authors delineated the entire superfamily consisting of many families with unique functional roles throughout all domains of life. The broad reach of this work further elevates its significance.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.108061.2.sa3

Reviewer #3 (Public review):

Reviewer

Summary:

The manuscript by Burroughs et al. uses informatic sequence analysis and structural modeling to define a very large, new superfamily which they dub the Lipocone superfamily, based on its function on lipid components and cone-shaped structure. The family includes known enzymatic domains as well as previously uncharacterized proteins (30 families in total). Support for the superfamily designation includes conserved residues located on the homologous helical structures within the fold. The findings include analyses that shed light on important evolutionary relationships including a model in which the superfamily originated as membrane proteins where one branch evolved into a soluble version. Their mechanistic proposals suggest possible functions for enzymes currently unassigned. There is also support for the evolutionary connection of this family with the human immune system. The work will be of interest to those in the broad areas of bioinformatics, enzyme mechanisms, and evolution. The work is technically well performed and presented.

DOI: 10.7554/eLife.108061.2.sa4

Author response

Burroughs A Maxwell Author National Institutes of Health Bethesda United States

Nicastro Gianlucca G Author National Institutes of Health Bethesda United States

Aravind L Author National Institutes of Health Bethesda United States

Point-by-point description of the revisions

Reviewer #1 (Evidence, reproducibility and clarity):

The study is well-executed and provides many interesting leads for further experimental studies, which makes it very important. One of the significant hypotheses in this context is metazoan Wnt Lipocone domain interactions with lipids, which remain to be explored.

The manuscript is generally navigable for interesting reading despite being content-rich. Overall, the figures are easy to follow.

We thank the reviewer for the thoughtful and favorable assessment.

Major comments:

I urge the authors to consider creating a first figure summarizing the broad approach and process involved in discovering the lipocone superfamily. This would help the average reader easily follow the manuscript.

It will be helpful to have the final model/synthesis figure, which provides a take-home message that combines the main deductions from Fig 1c, Fig 4, Fig 5, and Fig 6 to provide an eagle's eye view (also translating the arguments on Page 38 last para into this potential figure).

We have generated a two-part figure that synthesizes these two requests, also in line with the recommendations made by Reviewer 3. Depending on the accepting Review Commons journal, we plan to either submit this as a graphical abstract/TOC figure (as suggested by Reviewer 3) or as a single figure. We prefer starting with the first approach as it will keep our figure count the same.

Minor comments:

Fig 1C: The authors should provide a statistical estimate of the difference in transmembrane tendency scores between the "membrane" and "globular" versions of the Lipocone domains.

To address this, we calculated group-wise differences using the Kruskal-Wallis nonparametric test, followed by Dunn’s test with Bonferroni correction for a more stringent evaluation. The results of which are presented as a critical difference diagram in the new Supplementary Figure S3. The analysis is explained in the Methods section of the revised manuscript, and the statistically significant difference is mentioned in the text. This analysis identifies three groups of significantly different Lipocone families based on their transmembrane tendency: those predicted (or known) to associate with the prokaryotic membranes, those predicted to be diffusible, and a small number of families residing in eukaryotic ER membranes or bacterial outer membranes.

Reviewer #2 (Evidence, reproducibility and clarity):

This is a remarkable study, one of a kind. The authors trace the entire huge superfamily containing Wnt proteins which origins remained obscure before this work. Even more amazingly, they show that Wnts originated from transmembrane enzymes. The work is masterfully executed and presented. The conclusions are strongly supported by multiple lines of evidence. Illustrations are beautifully crafted. This is an exemplary work of how modern sequence and structure analysis methods should be used to gain unprecedented insights into protein evolution and origins.

We thank the reviewer for the positive evaluation of our work.

Minor comments.

(1) In fig 1, VanZ structure looks rather different from the rest and is a more tightly packed helical bundle. It might be useful for the readers to learn more about the arguments why authors consider this family to be homologous with the rest, and what caused these structural changes in packing of the helices.

First, the geometry of an α-helix can be approximated as a cylinder, resulting in contact points that are relatively small. Fewer contact constraints can lead to structural variation in the angular orientations between the helices of an all α-helical domain, resulting in some dispersion in space of the helical axes. As a result, some of the views can be a bit confounding when presented as static 2D images. Second, of the two VanZ clades the characteristic structure similar to the other superfamily members is more easily seen in the VanZ-2 clade (as illustrated in supplementary Figure S2).

Importantly, the membership of the VanZ domains was recovered via significant hits in our sequence analysis of the superfamily. When the sequence alignments of the active site are compared (Figure 2), VanZ retains the conserved active site residue positions, which are predicted to reside spatially in the same location and project into an equivalent active site pocket as seen in the other families in the superfamily. Further, this sequence relationship is captured by the edges in the network in Figure 1B: multiple members of the superfamily show edges indicating significant relationships with the two VanZ families (e.g., HHSearch hits of probability greater than 90%; p<0.0001 are observed between VanZ-1 and Skillet-DUF2809, Skillet-1, Skillet-4, YfiM-1, YfiM-DUF2279, Wok, pPTDSS, and cpCone-1). Thus, they occupy relatively central locations in the sequence similarity network, indicating a consistent sequence similarity connection to multiple other families.

(2) Fig. 4 color bars before names show a functional role. How does the blue bar "described for the first time" fits into this logic? Maybe some other way to mark this (an asterisk?) could be better to resolve this sematic inconsistency.

We have shifted the blue bars into asterisks, which follow family names, now stated in the updated legend.

Reviewer #3 (Evidence, reproducibility and clarity):

The manuscript by Burroughs et al. uses informatic sequence analysis and structural modeling to define a very large, new superfamily which they dub the Lipocone superfamily, based on its function on lipid components and cone-shaped structure. The family includes known enzymatic domains as well as previously uncharacterized proteins (30 families in total). Support for the superfamily designation includes conserved residues located on the homologous helical structures within the fold. The findings include analyses that shed light on important evolutionary relationships including a model in which the superfamily originated as membrane proteins where one branch evolved into a soluble version. Their mechanistic proposals suggest possible functions for enzymes currently unassigned. There is also support for the evolutionary connection of this family with the human immune system. The work will be of interest to those in the broad areas of bioinformatics, enzyme mechanisms, and evolution. The work is technically well performed and presented.

We appreciate the positive evaluation of our work by the reviewer.

Referees cross-commenting

All the comments seem useful to me. I like Reviewer 1's suggestion for a flowchart showing the methodology. I think the summarizing figure suggested could be a TOC abstract, which many journals request.

To accommodate this comment (along with Reviewer 1’s comments), we have generated a two-part figure containing the methodology flowchart and the summary of findings. Combining the two provides some before-and-after symmetry to a TOC figure, while also avoiding further inflation of the figure count, which would likely be an issue at one or more of the Review Commons journals.

The authors may wish to consider the following points (page numbers from PDF for review):

(1) It would be useful in Fig 1A, either in main text or the supporting information, to also have an accompanying topology diagram- I like the coloring of the helices to show the homology but the connections between them are hard to follow

We acknowledge the reviewer’s concern as one shared by ourselves. We have placed such a topology diagram in Figure 1A, and now refer to it at multiple points in the manuscript text.

(2) Page: 6- In the paragraph marked as an example- please call out Fig1A when the family mentioned is described (I believe SAA is described as one example)

We have added these pointers in the text, where appropriate.

(3) Page: 7- The authors state "these 'hydrophobic families' often evince a deeper phyletic distribution pattern than the less-hydrophobic families (Figure S1), implying that the ancestral version of the superfamily was likely a TM domain" there should be more explanation or information here - I am not certain from looking at FigS1 what a deeper phyletic distribution pattern means. Perhaps explaining for a single example? I also see that this important point is discussed in the conclusions- it is useful to point to the conclusion here.

Our use of the ‘deeper’ in this context is meant to convey the concept that more widely conserved families/clades (both across and within lineages) suggest an earlier emergence. In the Lipocone superfamily, this phylogenetic reasoning supports an evolutionary scenario where the membrane-inserted versions generally emerged early, while the solubilized versions, which are found in relatively fewer lineages, emerged later.

To address this objectively, we have calculated a simple phyletic distribution metric that combines the phyletic spread of a Lipocone clade with its depth within individual lineages, which is then plotted as a bargraph (Supplemental Figure S1). Briefly, this takes the width of the bar as the phyletic spread across the number of distinct taxonomic lineages and its height as a weighted mean of occurrence within each lineage (depth). The latter helps dampen the effects of sampling bias. In the resulting graph, lineages with a lower height and width are likely to have been derived later than those with a greater height and width. A detailed description clarifying this has been added to the Methods section of the revised manuscript. The results support two statements that are made in the text: (1) that the Wok and VanZ clades are the most widely and deeply represented clades in the superfamily, and (2) that the predicted transmembrane versions tend to be more widely and deeply distributed. We have also added a statement in the results with a pointer to Figure S1 to clarify this point raised by the referee.

(4) For figure 3 I would suggest instead of coloring by atom type- to color the leaving group red and the group being added blue so the reader can see where the moieties start and end in substrates and products

We have retained the atom type coloring in the figure for ease of visualizing the atom types. However, to address the reviewer’s concern, we have added dashed colored circles to highlight attacking and leaving groups in the reactions. The legend has been updated accordingly.

(5) Page: 13- The authors state "While the second copy in these versions is catalytically inactive, the H1' from the second duplicate displaces the H1 from the first copy," So this results in a "sort of domain swap" correct? It may be more clear to label both copies in Figure S3 upper right so it is easier for the reader to follow.

We have added these labels to the updated Figure S4 (formerly S3).

(6) The authors state "In addition to the fusion to the OMP β-barrel, the YfiM-DUF2279 family (Figure 5H) shows operonic associations with a secreted MltG-like peptidoglycan lytic transglycosylase (127,128), a lipid anchored cytochrome c heme-binding domain (129), a phosphoglucomutase/phosphomannomutase enzyme (130), a GNAT acyltransferase (131), a diaminopimelate (DAP) epimerase (132), and a lysozyme like enzyme (133). In a distinct operon, YfiM-DUF2279 is combined with a GT-A glycosyltransferase domain (79), a further OMP β-barrel, and a secreted PDZ-like domain fused to a ClpP-like serine protease (134,135) (Figure 5H)." this combination of enzymes sounds like those in the pathways for oligosaccharide synthesis which is cytoplasmic but the flippase acts to bring the product to the periplasm. Please make sure it is clear that these enzymes may act at different faces of the membrane.

We have made that point explicit in the revised manuscript in the paragraph following the above-quoted statement.

(7) Page: 21- the authors should remove the unpublished observations on other RDD domain or explain or cite them

The analysis of the RDD domain is a part of a distinct study whose manuscript we are currently preparing, and explaining its many ramifications would be outside the scope of this manuscript. Moreover, placing even an account of it in this manuscript would break its flow and take the focus away from the Lipocone superfamily. Further, its inclusion of the RDD story would substantially increase the size of the manuscript. However, it is commonly fused to the Lipocone domain; hence, it would be remiss if we entirely remove a reference to it. Accordingly, we retain a brief account of the RDD-fused Lipocone domains in the revised manuscript that is just sufficient to make the relevant functional case.

(8) Page: 34- The authors state "For instance, the emergence of the outer membrane in certain bacteria was potentially coupled with the origin of the YfiM and Griddle clades (Figure 4)." I don't see origin point indicated in figure 4 emergence of outer membrane- this may be helpful to indicate in some way- also I am not certain what the dashed circles in Fig 4 are indicating- its not in the legend?

This annotation has been added to the revised Figure 4, and the point of recruitment is indicated with a “X” sign, along with a clarification in the legend regarding the dashed circles.

(9) In terms of the hydrophobicity analysis, it would be good to mark on the plot (Fig 1C) one or two examples of lipocone members with known structure that are transmembrane proteins as a positive control

We have added these markers (colored triangles and squares for these families to the plot).

Grammar, typos

Page: 3- abstract severance is an odd word to use for hydrolysis or cleavage

We have changed to “cleavage”.

Page: 5- "While the structure of Wnt was described over a decade prior" should read "Although the structure of ..."

Page 7 - "One family did not yield a consistent prediction for orientation"- please state which family

Page: 8 "While the ancestral pattern is noticeably degraded in the metazoan Wnt (Met-Wnt) family, it is strongly preserved in the prokaryotic Min-Wnt family." Should read "Although the ancestral..."

throughout- please replace solved with experimentally determined to be clear and avoid jargon

Please replace "TelC severs the link" with "TelC cleaves the bond "

We have made the above changes.

Page: 19- the authors state "a lipobox-containing synaptojanin superfamily phosphoesterase (125) and a secreted R-P phosphatase (126) (see Figure 6, Supplementary Data)" I was uncertain if the authors meant Fig S6 or they meant see Fig 6 and something else in supplementary data. Please fix.

In this pointer, we intended to flag the relevant gene neighborhoods in both Figures 5H and 6, as well as highlight the additional examples contained in the Supplementary Data. We have updated the point.

No competing interests declared.

Conceptualization, Data curation, Formal analysis, Validation, Investigation, Visualization, Methodology, Writing – original draft, Writing – review and editing.

Conceptualization, Data curation, Software, Formal analysis, Validation, Investigation, Visualization, Methodology.

Conceptualization, Formal analysis, Supervision, Funding acquisition, Validation, Investigation, Methodology, Project administration, Writing – review and editing.


References

Abramson J Adler J Dunger J Evans R Green T Pritzel A Ronneberger O Willmore L Ballard AJ Bambrick J Bodenstein SW Evans DA Hung C-C O’Neill M Reiman D Tunyasuvunakool K Wu Z Žemgulytė A Arvaniti E Beattie C Bertolli O Bridgland A Cherepanov A Congreve M Cowen-Rivers AI Cowie A Figurnov M Fuchs FB Gladman H Jain R Khan YA Low CMR Perlin K Potapenko A Savy P Singh S Stecula A Thillaisundaram A Tong C Yakneen S Zhong ED Zielinski M Žídek A Bapst V Kohli P Jaderberg M Hassabis D Jumper JM 2024 Accurate structure prediction of biomolecular interactions with AlphaFold 3 Nature 630 493 500 10.1038/s41586-024-07487-w 38718835 PMC11168924
AhYoung AP Koehl A Vizcarra CL Cascio D Egea PF 2016 Structure of a putative ClpS N-end rule adaptor protein from the malaria pathogen Plasmodium falciparum Protein Science 25 689 701 10.1002/pro.2868 26701219 PMC4815404
Akanuma G Kazo Y Tagami K Hiraoka H Yano K Suzuki S Hanai R Nanamiya H Kato-Yamada Y Kawamura F 2016 Ribosome dimerization is essential for the efficient regrowth of Bacillus subtilis Microbiology 162 448 458 10.1099/mic.0.000234 26743942
Alcoforado Diniz J Coulthurst SJ 2015 Intraspecies competition in serratia marcescens is mediated by type VI-Secreted Rhs effectors and a conserved effector-associated accessory protein Journal of Bacteriology 197 2350 2360 10.1128/JB.00199-15 25939831 PMC4524185
Altschul SF Madden TL Schäffer AA Zhang J Zhang Z Miller W Lipman DJ 1997 Gapped BLAST and PSI-BLAST: a new generation of protein database search programs Nucleic Acids Research 25 3389 3402 10.1093/nar/25.17.3389 9254694 PMC146917
Anantharaman V Aravind L 2003 Evolutionary history, structural features and biochemical diversity of the NlpC/P60 superfamily of enzymes Genome Biology 4 R11 10.1186/gb-2003-4-2-r11 12620121 PMC151301
Anderson JS Matsuhashi M Haskin MA Strominger JL 1967 Biosythesis of the peptidoglycan of bacterial cell walls. II. Phospholipid carriers in the reaction sequence The Journal of Biological Chemistry 242 3180 3190 6027793
Antia M Hoare DS Work E 1957 The stereoisomers of alpha epsilon-diaminopimelic acid. III. Properties and distribution of diaminopimelic acid racemase, an enzyme causing interconversion of the LL and meso isomers The Biochemical Journal 65 448 459 10.1042/bj0650448 13412646 PMC1199896
Aoki SK Malinverni JC Jacoby K Thomas B Pamma R Trinh BN Remers S Webb J Braaten BA Silhavy TJ Low DA 2008 Contact-dependent growth inhibition requires the essential outer membrane protein BamA (YaeT) as the receptor and the inner membrane transport protein AcrB Molecular Microbiology 70 323 340 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2008.06404.x 18761695 PMC2579741
Aravind L Koonin EV 1998a Phosphoesterase domains associated with DNA polymerases of diverse origins Nucleic Acids Research 26 3746 3752 10.1093/nar/26.16.3746 9685491 PMC147763
Aravind L Koonin EV 1998b The HD domain defines a new superfamily of metal-dependent phosphohydrolases Trends in Biochemical Sciences 23 469 472 10.1016/s0968-0004(98)01293-6 9868367
Aravind L 1999 An evolutionary classification of the metallo-beta-lactamase fold proteins In Silico Biology 1 69 91 11471246
Aravind L 2000 Guilt by association: contextual information in genome analysis Genome Research 10 1074 1077 10.1101/gr.10.8.1074 10958625
Aravind L Anantharaman V Balaji S Babu MM Iyer LM 2005 The many faces of the helix-turn-helix domain: transcription regulation and beyond FEMS Microbiology Reviews 29 231 262 10.1016/j.femsre.2004.12.008 15808743
Aravind L Anantharaman V Zhang D de Souza RF Iyer LM 2012 Gene flow and biological conflict systems in the origin and evolution of eukaryotes Frontiers in Cellular and Infection Microbiology 2 89 10.3389/fcimb.2012.00089 22919680 PMC3417536
Aravind L Iyer LM Burroughs AM 2022 Discovering biological conflict systems through genome analysis: evolutionary principles and biochemical novelty Annual Review of Biomedical Data Science 5 367 391 10.1146/annurev-biodatasci-122220-101119 35609893
Aravind L Nicastro GG Iyer LM Burroughs AM 2024 The prokaryotic roots of eukaryotic immune systems Annual Review of Genetics 58 365 389 10.1146/annurev-genet-111523-102448 39265037
Archbold HC Yang YX Chen L Cadigan KM 2012 How do they do Wnt they do?: regulation of transcription by the Wnt/β-catenin pathway Acta Physiologica 204 74 109 10.1111/j.1748-1716.2011.02293.x 21624092
Arthur M Molinas C Courvalin P 1992 Sequence of the vanY gene required for production of a vancomycin-inducible D,D-carboxypeptidase in Enterococcus faecium BM4147 Gene 120 111 114 10.1016/0378-1119(92)90017-j 1398115
Arthur M Depardieu F Snaith HA Reynolds PE Courvalin P 1994 Contribution of VanY D,D-carboxypeptidase to glycopeptide resistance in Enterococcus faecalis by hydrolysis of peptidoglycan precursors Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy 38 1899 1903 10.1128/AAC.38.9.1899 7810996 PMC284659
Arthur M Depardieu F Molinas C Reynolds P Courvalin P 1995 The vanZ gene of Tn1546 from Enterococcus faecium BM4147 confers resistance to teicoplanin Gene 154 87 92 10.1016/0378-1119(94)00851-i 7867956
Arthur M Depardieu F Cabanié L Reynolds P Courvalin P 1998 Requirement of the VanY and VanX D,D-peptidases for glycopeptide resistance in enterococci Molecular Microbiology 30 819 830 10.1046/j.1365-2958.1998.01114.x 10094630
Arthur M Depardieu F Reynolds P Courvalin P 1999 Moderate-level resistance to glycopeptide LY333328 mediated by genes of the vanA and vanB clusters in enterococci Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy 43 1875 1880 10.1128/AAC.43.8.1875 10428906 PMC89384
Ashraf KU Nygaard R Vickery ON Erramilli SK Herrera CM McConville TH Petrou VI Giacometti SI Dufrisne MB Nosol K Zinkle AP Graham CLB Loukeris M Kloss B Skorupinska-Tudek K Swiezewska E Roper DI Clarke OB Uhlemann AC Kossiakoff AA Trent MS Stansfeld PJ Mancia F 2022 Structural basis of lipopolysaccharide maturation by the O-antigen ligase Nature 604 371 376 10.1038/s41586-022-04555-x 35388216 PMC9884178
Babu MM Priya ML Selvan AT Madera M Gough J Aravind L Sankaran K 2006 A database of bacterial lipoproteins (DOLOP) with functional assignments to predicted lipoproteins Journal of Bacteriology 188 2761 2773 10.1128/JB.188.8.2761-2773.2006 16585737 PMC1446993
Barák I Muchová K 2013 The role of lipid domains in bacterial cell processes International Journal of Molecular Sciences 14 4050 4065 10.3390/ijms14024050 23429192 PMC3588084
Bastard K Smith AAT Vergne-Vaxelaire C Perret A Zaparucha A De Melo-Minardi R Mariage A Boutard M Debard A Lechaplais C Pelle C Pellouin V Perchat N Petit J-L Kreimeyer A Medigue C Weissenbach J Artiguenave F De Berardinis V Vallenet D Salanoubat M 2014 Revealing the hidden functional diversity of an enzyme family Nature Chemical Biology 10 42 49 10.1038/nchembio.1387 24240508
Bazan JF Janda CY Garcia KC 2012 Structural architecture and functional evolution of Wnts Developmental Cell 23 227 232 10.1016/j.devcel.2012.07.011 22898770 PMC3458506
Becker A Kleickmann A Küster H Keller M Arnold W Pühler A 1993 Analysis of the Rhizobium meliloti genes exoU, exoV, exoW, exoT, and exoI involved in exopolysaccharide biosynthesis and nodule invasion: exoU and exoW probably encode glucosyltransferases Molecular Plant-Microbe Interactions 6 735 744 10.1094/mpmi-6-735 8118055
Bellinzoni M Haouz A Miras I Magnet S André-Leroux G Mukherjee R Shepard W Cole ST Alzari PM 2014 Structural studies suggest a peptidoglycan hydrolase function for the Mycobacterium tuberculosis Tat-secreted protein Rv2525c Journal of Structural Biology 188 156 164 10.1016/j.jsb.2014.09.003 25260828
Bennett HJ Davenport JB Collins RF Trafford AW Pinali C Kitmitto A 2013 Human junctophilin-2 undergoes a structural rearrangement upon binding PtdIns(3,4,5)P3 and the S101R mutation identified in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy obviates this response The Biochemical Journal 456 205 217 10.1042/BJ20130591 24001019 PMC3898329
Benson TE Prince DB Mutchler VT Curry KA Ho AM Sarver RW Hagadorn JC Choi GH Garlick RL 2002 X-ray crystal structure of Staphylococcus aureus FemA Structure 10 1107 1115 10.1016/s0969-2126(02)00807-9 12176388
Berardini TZ Reiser L Li D Mezheritsky Y Muller R Strait E Huala E 2015 The Arabidopsis information resource: Making and mining the “gold standard” annotated reference plant genome Genesis 53 474 485 10.1002/dvg.22877 26201819 PMC4545719
Berman H Henrick K Nakamura H Markley JL 2007 The worldwide Protein Data Bank (wwPDB): ensuring a single, uniform archive of PDB data Nucleic Acids Research 35 D301 D303 10.1093/nar/gkl971 17142228 PMC1669775
Bhanot P Brink M Samos CH Hsieh JC Wang Y Macke JP Andrew D Nathans J Nusse R 1996 A new member of the frizzled family from Drosophila functions as a wingless receptor Nature 382 225 230 10.1038/382225a0 8717036
Blanco LP Evans ML Smith DR Badtke MP Chapman MR 2012 Diversity, biogenesis and function of microbial amyloids Trends in Microbiology 20 66 73 10.1016/j.tim.2011.11.005 22197327 PMC3278576
Bliven S Prlić A 2012 Circular permutation in proteins PLOS Computational Biology 8 e1002445 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1002445 22496628 PMC3320104
Boraston AB Bolam DN Gilbert HJ Davies GJ 2004 Carbohydrate-binding modules: fine-tuning polysaccharide recognition The Biochemical Journal 382 769 781 10.1042/BJ20040892 15214846 PMC1133952
Burroughs AM Allen KN Dunaway-Mariano D Aravind L 2006 Evolutionary genomics of the HAD superfamily: understanding the structural adaptations and catalytic diversity in a superfamily of phosphoesterases and allied enzymes Journal of Molecular Biology 361 1003 1034 10.1016/j.jmb.2006.06.049 16889794
Burroughs AM Aravind L 2014 Analysis of two domains with novel RNA-processing activities throws light on the complex evolution of ribosomal RNA biogenesis Frontiers in Genetics 5 424 10.3389/fgene.2014.00424 25566315 PMC4275035
Burroughs AM Aravind L 2016 RNA damage in biological conflicts and the diversity of responding RNA repair systems Nucleic Acids Research 44 8525 8555 10.1093/nar/gkw722 27536007 PMC5062991
Burroughs AM Aravind L 2020 Identification of uncharacterized components of prokaryotic immune systems and their diverse eukaryotic reformulations Journal of Bacteriology 202 e00365-20 10.1128/JB.00365-20 32868406 PMC7685563
Burroughs AM Aravind L 2023 New biochemistry in the Rhodanese-phosphatase superfamily: emerging roles in diverse metabolic processes, nucleic acid modifications, and biological conflicts NAR Genomics and Bioinformatics 5 lqad029 10.1093/nargab/lqad029 36968430 PMC10034599
Caforio A Driessen AJM 2017 Archaeal phospholipids: Structural properties and biosynthesis Biochimica et Biophysica Acta. Molecular and Cell Biology of Lipids 1862 1325 1339 10.1016/j.bbalip.2016.12.006 28007654
Cai R Wang G Le S Wu M Cheng M Guo Z Ji Y Xi H Zhao C Wang X Xue Y Wang Z Zhang H Fu Y Sun C Feng X Lei L Yang Y Ur Rahman S Liu X Han W Gu J 2019 Three capsular polysaccharide synthesis-related glucosyltransferases, GT-1, GT-2 and WcaJ, are associated with virulence and phage sensitivity of Klebsiella pneumoniae Frontiers in Microbiology 10 1189 10.3389/fmicb.2019.01189 31191500 PMC6546894
Cao Z Casabona MG Kneuper H Chalmers JD Palmer T 2016 The type VII secretion system of Staphylococcus aureus secretes a nuclease toxin that targets competitor bacteria Nature Microbiology 2 16183 10.1038/nmicrobiol.2016.183 27723728 PMC5325307
Carman GM Han GS 2006 Roles of phosphatidate phosphatase enzymes in lipid metabolism Trends in Biochemical Sciences 31 694 699 10.1016/j.tibs.2006.10.003 17079146 PMC1769311
Carr S Penfold CN Bamford V James R Hemmings AM 2000 The structure of TolB, an essential component of the tol-dependent translocation system, and its protein-protein interaction with the translocation domain of colicin E9 Structure 8 57 66 10.1016/s0969-2126(00)00079-4 10673426
Chagnot C Zorgani MA Astruc T Desvaux M 2013 Proteinaceous determinants of surface colonization in bacteria: bacterial adhesion and biofilm formation from a protein secretion perspective Frontiers in Microbiology 4 303 10.3389/fmicb.2013.00303 24133488 PMC3796261
Chamovitz D Misawa N Sandmann G Hirschberg J 1992 Molecular cloning and expression in Escherichia coli of a cyanobacterial gene coding for phytoene synthase, a carotenoid biosynthesis enzyme FEBS Letters 296 305 310 10.1016/0014-5793(92)80310-d 1537409
Chen CK-M Chan N-L Wang AH-J 2011 The many blades of the β-propeller proteins: conserved but versatile Trends in Biochemical Sciences 36 553 561 10.1016/j.tibs.2011.07.004 21924917
Chérier D Patin D Blanot D Touzé T Barreteau H 2021 The biology of Colicin M and its orthologs Antibiotics 10 1109 10.3390/antibiotics10091109 34572691 PMC8469651
Christian JL 2000 BMP, Wnt and Hedgehog signals: how far can they go? Current Opinion in Cell Biology 12 244 249 10.1016/s0955-0674(99)00082-4 10819541
Chu MLH Ahn VE Choi HJ Daniels DL Nusse R Weis WI 2013 Structural studies of Wnts and identification of an LRP6 binding site Structure 21 1235 1242 10.1016/j.str.2013.05.006 23791946 PMC3731992
Cortajarena AL Regan L 2006 Ligand binding by TPR domains Protein Science 15 1193 1198 10.1110/ps.062092506 16641492 PMC2242500
Costa T Isidro AL Moran CP Henriques AO 2006 Interaction between coat morphogenetic proteins SafA and SpoVID Journal of Bacteriology 188 7731 7741 10.1128/JB.00761-06 16950916 PMC1636312
Csardi G Nepusz T 2006 The Igraph Software Package for Complex Network Research InterJournal, Complex Systems
Daiyasu H Kuma KI Yokoi T Morii H Koga Y Toh H 2005 A study of archaeal enzymes involved in polar lipid synthesis linking amino acid sequence information, genomic contexts and lipid composition Archaea 1 399 410 10.1155/2005/452563 16243780 PMC2685579
Das K Xiao R Wahlberg E Hsu F Arrowsmith CH Montelione GT Arnold E 2001 X-ray crystal structure of MTH938 from Methanobacterium thermoautotrophicum at 2.2 A resolution reveals a novel tertiary protein fold Proteins 45 486 488 10.1002/prot.1162 11746696
Das D Lee WS Grant JC Chiu HJ Farr CL Vance J Klock HE Knuth MW Miller MD Elsliger MA Deacon AM Godzik A Lesley SA Kornfeld S Wilson IA 2013 Structure and function of the DUF2233 domain in bacteria and in the human mannose 6-phosphate uncovering enzyme The Journal of Biological Chemistry 288 16789 16799 10.1074/jbc.M112.434977 23572527 PMC3675612
Dhanaraj V Ye QZ Johnson LL Hupe DJ Ortwine DF Dunbar JB Rubin JR Pavlovsky A Humblet C Blundell TL 1996 X-ray structure of a hydroxamate inhibitor complex of stromelysin catalytic domain and its comparison with members of the zinc metalloproteinase superfamily Structure 4 375 386 10.1016/s0969-2126(96)00043-3 8740360
Dideberg O Charlier P Dive G Joris B Frère JM Ghuysen JM 1982 Structure of a Zn2+-containing D-alanyl-D-alanine-cleaving carboxypeptidase at 2.5 A resolution Nature 299 469 470 10.1038/299469a0 7121588
Di Guilmi AM Dessen A Dideberg O Vernet T 2003 The glycosyltransferase domain of penicillin-binding protein 2a from Streptococcus pneumoniae catalyzes the polymerization of murein glycan chains Journal of Bacteriology 185 4418 4423 10.1128/JB.185.15.4418-4423.2003 12867450 PMC165775
Dong X Kato-Murayama M Muramatsu T Mori H Shirouzu M Bessho Y Yokoyama S 2007 The crystal structure of leucyl/phenylalanyl-tRNA-protein transferase from Escherichia coli Protein Science 16 528 534 10.1110/ps.062616107 17242373 PMC2203310
Dong X Leksa NC Chhabra ES Arndt JW Lu Q Knockenhauer KE Peters RT Springer TA 2019 The von Willebrand factor D’D3 assembly and structural principles for factor VIII binding and concatemer biogenesis Blood 133 1523 1533 10.1182/blood-2018-10-876300 30642920 PMC6450429
Durocher D Henckel J Fersht AR Jackson SP 1999 The FHA domain is a modular phosphopeptide recognition motif Molecular Cell 4 387 394 10.1016/s1097-2765(00)80340-8 10518219
Durr IF Rudney H 1960 The reduction of beta-hydroxy-beta-methyl-glutaryl coenzyme A to mevalonic acid The Journal of Biological Chemistry 235 2572 2578 13818862
Dziarski R Gupta D 2006a The peptidoglycan recognition proteins (PGRPs) Genome Biology 7 232 10.1186/gb-2006-7-8-232 16930467 PMC1779587
Dziarski R Gupta D 2006b Mammalian PGRPs: novel antibacterial proteins Cellular Microbiology 8 1059 1069 10.1111/j.1462-5822.2006.00726.x 16819960
Dziarski R Gupta D 2010 Review: Mammalian peptidoglycan recognition proteins (PGRPs) in innate immunity Innate Immunity 16 168 174 10.1177/1753425910366059 20418257
Eddy SR 2011 Accelerated Profile HMM Searches PLOS Computational Biology 7 e1002195 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1002195 22039361 PMC3197634
Egan AJF Errington J Vollmer W 2020 Regulation of peptidoglycan synthesis and remodelling Nature Reviews. Microbiology 18 446 460 10.1038/s41579-020-0366-3 32424210
Einsle O Messerschmidt A Stach P Bourenkov GP Bartunik HD Huber R Kroneck PM 1999 Structure of cytochrome c nitrite reductase Nature 400 476 480 10.1038/22802 10440380
English D 1996 Phosphatidic acid: a lipid messenger involved in intracellular and extracellular signalling Cellular Signalling 8 341 347 10.1016/0898-6568(95)00076-3 8911682
Fairman JW Noinaj N Buchanan SK 2011 The structural biology of β-barrel membrane proteins: a summary of recent reports Current Opinion in Structural Biology 21 523 531 10.1016/j.sbi.2011.05.005 21719274 PMC3164749
Fields RN Roy H 2018 Deciphering the tRNA-dependent lipid aminoacylation systems in bacteria: Novel components and structural advances RNA Biology 15 480 491 10.1080/15476286.2017.1356980 28816600 PMC6103681
Finn RD Coggill P Eberhardt RY Eddy SR Mistry J Mitchell AL Potter SC Punta M Qureshi M Sangrador-Vegas A Salazar GA Tate J Bateman A 2016 The Pfam protein families database: towards a more sustainable future Nucleic Acids Research 44 D279 D285 10.1093/nar/gkv1344 26673716 PMC4702930
Flint J Nurizzo D Harding SE Longman E Davies GJ Gilbert HJ Bolam DN 2004 Ligand-mediated dimerization of a carbohydrate-binding molecule reveals a novel mechanism for protein-carbohydrate recognition Journal of Molecular Biology 337 417 426 10.1016/j.jmb.2003.12.081 15003456
Franco AV Liu D Reeves PR 1998 The wzz (cld) protein in Escherichia coli: amino acid sequence variation determines O-antigen chain length specificity Journal of Bacteriology 180 2670 2675 10.1128/JB.180.10.2670-2675.1998 9573151 PMC107218
Fraser ME Joyce MA Ryan DG Wolodko WT 2002 Two glutamate residues, Glu 208 alpha and Glu 197 beta, are crucial for phosphorylation and dephosphorylation of the active-site histidine residue in succinyl-CoA synthetase Biochemistry 41 537 546 10.1021/bi011518y 11781092
Gao C Chen YG 2010 Dishevelled: The hub of Wnt signaling Cellular Signalling 22 717 727 10.1016/j.cellsig.2009.11.021 20006983
Ghosh M Tucker DE Burchett SA Leslie CC 2006 Properties of the Group IV phospholipase A2 family Progress in Lipid Research 45 487 510 10.1016/j.plipres.2006.05.003 16814865
Glasner ME Gerlt JA Babbitt PC 2006 Evolution of enzyme superfamilies Current Opinion in Chemical Biology 10 492 497 10.1016/j.cbpa.2006.08.012 16935022
Guo D Tropp BE 2000 A second Escherichia coli protein with CL synthase activity Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1483 263 274 10.1016/s1388-1981(99)00193-6 10634942
Guo R-T Ko T-P Chen AP-C Kuo C-J Wang AH-J Liang P-H 2005 Crystal structures of undecaprenyl pyrophosphate synthase in complex with magnesium, isopentenyl pyrophosphate, and farnesyl thiopyrophosphate: roles of the metal ion and conserved residues in catalysis The Journal of Biological Chemistry 280 20762 20774 10.1074/jbc.M502121200 15788389
Hagan CL Kahne D 2011 The reconstituted Escherichia coli Bam complex catalyzes multiple rounds of β-barrel assembly Biochemistry 50 7444 7446 10.1021/bi2010784 21823654 PMC3192448
Hagberg AA Schult DA Swart PJ 2008 Exploring network structure, dynamics, and function using NetworkX Python in Science Conference 10.25080/TCWV9851
Han W Wu B Li L Zhao G Woodward R Pettit N Cai L Thon V Wang PG 2012 Defining function of lipopolysaccharide O-antigen ligase WaaL using chemoenzymatically synthesized substrates The Journal of Biological Chemistry 287 5357 5365 10.1074/jbc.M111.308486 22158874 PMC3285315
Hancock RE 1997 Peptide antibiotics The Lancet 349 418 422 10.1016/S0140-6736(97)80051-7 9033483
Hara H Yamamoto Y Higashitani A Suzuki H Nishimura Y 1991 Cloning, mapping, and characterization of the Escherichia coli prc gene, which is involved in C-terminal processing of penicillin-binding protein 3 Journal of Bacteriology 173 4799 4813 10.1128/jb.173.15.4799-4813.1991 1856173 PMC208159
Hari-Dass R Shah C Meyer DJ Raynes JG 2005 Serum amyloid A protein binds to outer membrane protein A of gram-negative bacteria The Journal of Biological Chemistry 280 18562 18567 10.1074/jbc.M500490200 15705572
Hauck AK Bernlohr DA 2016 Oxidative stress and lipotoxicity Journal of Lipid Research 57 1976 1986 10.1194/jlr.R066597 27009116 PMC5087875
Hauser M Steinegger M Söding J 2016 MMseqs software suite for fast and deep clustering and searching of large protein sequence sets Bioinformatics 32 1323 1330 10.1093/bioinformatics/btw006 26743509
Hermoso JA Monterroso B Albert A Galán B Ahrazem O García P Martínez-Ripoll M García JL Menéndez M 2003 Structural basis for selective recognition of pneumococcal cell wall by modular endolysin from phage Cp-1 Structure 11 1239 1249 10.1016/j.str.2003.09.005 14527392
Heydanek MG Neuhaus FC Linzer R 1969 The initial stage in peptidoglycan synthesis. IV. Solubilization of phospho-N-acetylmuramyl-pentapeptide translocase Biochemistry 8 1474 1481 10.1021/bi00832a024 5805290
Higashi Y Strominger JL Sweeley CC 1967 Structure of a lipid intermediate in cell wall peptidoglycan synthesis: a derivative of a C55 isoprenoid alcohol PNAS 57 1878 1884 10.1073/pnas.57.6.1878 5231417 PMC224560
Hofmann K 2000 A superfamily of membrane-bound O-acyltransferases with implications for wnt signaling Trends in Biochemical Sciences 25 111 112 10.1016/s0968-0004(99)01539-x 10694878
Holm L 2019 Benchmarking fold detection by DaliLite v.5 Bioinformatics 35 5326 5327 10.1093/bioinformatics/btz536 31263867
Holstein TW 2012 The evolution of the Wnt pathway Cold Spring Harbor Perspectives in Biology 4 a007922 10.1101/cshperspect.a007922 22751150 PMC3385961
Höltje JV Mirelman D Sharon N Schwarz U 1975 Novel type of murein transglycosylase in Escherichia coli Journal of Bacteriology 124 1067 1076 10.1128/jb.124.3.1067-1076.1975 357 PMC236007
Holzem M Boutros M Holstein TW 2024 The origin and evolution of Wnt signalling Nature Reviews. Genetics 25 500 512 10.1038/s41576-024-00699-w 38374446
Hong Y Hu D Verderosa AD Qin J Totsika M Reeves PR 2023 Repeat-unit elongations to produce bacterial complex long polysaccharide chains, an O-Antigen perspective EcoSal Plus 11 eesp00202022 10.1128/ecosalplus.esp-0020-2022 36622162 PMC10729934
Imperiali B 2019 Bacterial carbohydrate diversity - a brave new world Current Opinion in Chemical Biology 53 1 8 10.1016/j.cbpa.2019.04.026 31176085 PMC6893104
Iyer LM Koonin EV Aravind L 2001 Adaptations of the helix-grip fold for ligand binding and catalysis in the START domain superfamily Proteins 43 134 144 10.1002/1097-0134(20010501)43:2<134::aid-prot1025>3.0.co;2-i 11276083
Iyer LM Abhiman S Maxwell Burroughs A Aravind L 2009 Amidoligases with ATP-grasp, glutamine synthetase-like and acetyltransferase-like domains: synthesis of novel metabolites and peptide modifications of proteins Molecular bioSystems 5 1636 1660 10.1039/b917682a 20023723 PMC3268129
Iyer LM Zhang D Rogozin IB Aravind L 2011 Evolution of the deaminase fold and multiple origins of eukaryotic editing and mutagenic nucleic acid deaminases from bacterial toxin systems Nucleic Acids Research 39 9473 9497 10.1093/nar/gkr691 21890906 PMC3239186
Janda CY Waghray D Levin AM Thomas C Garcia KC 2012 Structural basis of Wnt recognition by Frizzled Science 337 59 64 10.1126/science.1222879 22653731 PMC3577348
Jessen S Gu B Dai X 2008 Pygopus and the Wnt signaling pathway: a diverse set of connections BioEssays 30 448 456 10.1002/bies.20757 18404694
Johnson LS Eddy SR Portugaly E 2010 Hidden Markov model speed heuristic and iterative HMM search procedure BMC Bioinformatics 11 431 10.1186/1471-2105-11-431 20718988 PMC2931519
Jones JDG Dangl JL 2006 The plant immune system Nature 444 323 329 10.1038/nature05286 17108957
Jumper J Evans R Pritzel A Green T Figurnov M Ronneberger O Tunyasuvunakool K Bates R Žídek A Potapenko A Bridgland A Meyer C Kohl SAA Ballard AJ Cowie A Romera-Paredes B Nikolov S Jain R Adler J Back T Petersen S Reiman D Clancy E Zielinski M Steinegger M Pacholska M Berghammer T Bodenstein S Silver D Vinyals O Senior AW Kavukcuoglu K Kohli P Hassabis D 2021 Highly accurate protein structure prediction with AlphaFold Nature 596 583 589 10.1038/s41586-021-03819-2 34265844 PMC8371605
Kadirvelraj R Foley BL Dyekjaer JD Woods RJ 2008 Involvement of water in carbohydrate-protein binding: concanavalin A revisited Journal of the American Chemical Society 130 16933 16942 10.1021/ja8039663 19053475 PMC2626182
Kamada K Miyata M Hirano T 2013 Molecular basis of SMC ATPase activation: role of internal structural changes of the regulatory subcomplex ScpAB Structure 21 581 594 10.1016/j.str.2013.02.016 23541893
Katoh K Standley DM 2013 MAFFT multiple sequence alignment software version 7: improvements in performance and usability Molecular Biology and Evolution 30 772 780 10.1093/molbev/mst010 23329690 PMC3603318
Kaur G Burroughs AM Iyer LM Aravind L 2020 Highly regulated, diversifying NTP-dependent biological conflict systems with implications for the emergence of multicellularity eLife 9 e52696 10.7554/eLife.52696 32101166 PMC7159879
Kaur G Iyer LM Burroughs AM Aravind L 2021 Bacterial death and TRADD-N domains help define novel apoptosis and immunity mechanisms shared by prokaryotes and metazoans eLife 10 e70394 10.7554/eLife.70394 34061031 PMC8195603
Kim S Malinverni JC Sliz P Silhavy TJ Harrison SC Kahne D 2007 Structure and function of an essential component of the outer membrane protein assembly machine Science 317 961 964 10.1126/science.1143993 17702946
Kim S Pires MM Im W 2018 Insight into elongation stages of peptidoglycan processing in bacterial cytoplasmic membranes Scientific Reports 8 17704 10.1038/s41598-018-36075-y 30531805 PMC6286386
Kitagawa D Vakonakis I Olieric N Hilbert M Keller D Olieric V Bortfeld M Erat MC Flückiger I Gönczy P Steinmetz MO 2011 Structural basis of the 9-fold symmetry of centrioles Cell 144 364 375 10.1016/j.cell.2011.01.008 21277013 PMC3089914
Klein TA Pazos M Surette MG Vollmer W Whitney JC 2018 Molecular basis for immunity protein recognition of a type VII secretion system exported antibacterial toxin Journal of Molecular Biology 430 4344 4358 10.1016/j.jmb.2018.08.027 30194969 PMC6193138
Klingensmith J Nusse R Perrimon N 1994 The Drosophila segment polarity gene dishevelled encodes a novel protein required for response to the wingless signal Genes & Development 8 118 130 10.1101/gad.8.1.118 8288125
Knowles TJ Browning DF Jeeves M Maderbocus R Rajesh S Sridhar P Manoli E Emery D Sommer U Spencer A Leyton DL Squire D Chaudhuri RR Viant MR Cunningham AF Henderson IR Overduin M 2011 Structure and function of BamE within the outer membrane and the β-barrel assembly machine EMBO Reports 12 123 128 10.1038/embor.2010.202 21212804 PMC3049429
Koga Y Morii H 2005 Recent advances in structural research on ether lipids from archaea including comparative and physiological aspects Bioscience, Biotechnology, and Biochemistry 69 2019 2034 10.1271/bbb.69.2019 16306681
Koga Y Morii H 2007 Biosynthesis of ether-type polar lipids in archaea and evolutionary considerations Microbiology and Molecular Biology Reviews 71 97 120 10.1128/MMBR.00033-06 17347520 PMC1847378
Komiya Y Habas R 2008 Wnt signal transduction pathways Organogenesis 4 68 75 10.4161/org.4.2.5851 19279717 PMC2634250
Koraimann G 2003 Lytic transglycosylases in macromolecular transport systems of Gram-negative bacteria Cellular and Molecular Life Sciences 60 2371 2388 10.1007/s00018-003-3056-1 14625683 PMC11138577
Kordis D Turk V 2009 Phylogenomic analysis of the cystatin superfamily in eukaryotes and prokaryotes BMC Evolutionary Biology 9 266 10.1186/1471-2148-9-266 19919722 PMC2784779
Kramps T Peter O Brunner E Nellen D Froesch B Chatterjee S Murone M Züllig S Basler K 2002 Wnt/wingless signaling requires BCL9/legless-mediated recruitment of pygopus to the nuclear beta-catenin-TCF complex Cell 109 47 60 10.1016/s0092-8674(02)00679-7 11955446
Krishnan A Iyer LM Holland SJ Boehm T Aravind L 2018 Diversification of AID/APOBEC-like deaminases in metazoa: multiplicity of clades and widespread roles in immunity PNAS 115 E3201 E3210 10.1073/pnas.1720897115 29555751 PMC5889660
Kuge O Nishijima M Akamatsu Y 1991 A Chinese hamster cDNA encoding a protein essential for phosphatidylserine synthase I activity The Journal of Biological Chemistry 266 24184 24189 1748687
Kuge O Saito K Nishijima M 1997 Cloning of a Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cDNA encoding phosphatidylserine synthase (PSS) II, overexpression of which suppresses the phosphatidylserine biosynthetic defect of a PSS I-lacking mutant of CHO-K1 cells The Journal of Biological Chemistry 272 19133 19139 10.1074/jbc.272.31.19133 9235902
Kuk ACY Hao A Lee SY 2022 Structure and mechanism of the lipid flippase MurJ Annual Review of Biochemistry 91 705 729 10.1146/annurev-biochem-040320-105145 35320686 PMC10108830
Kurayoshi M Yamamoto H Izumi S Kikuchi A 2007 Post-translational palmitoylation and glycosylation of Wnt-5a are necessary for its signalling The Biochemical Journal 402 515 523 10.1042/BJ20061476 17117926 PMC1863570
Lee JO Rieu P Arnaout MA Liddington R 1995 Crystal structure of the A domain from the alpha subunit of integrin CR3 (CD11b/CD18) Cell 80 631 638 10.1016/0092-8674(95)90517-0 7867070
Lee J Geddes K Streutker C Philpott DJ Girardin SE 2012 Role of mouse peptidoglycan recognition protein PGLYRP2 in the innate immune response to Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium infection in vivo Infection and Immunity 80 2645 2654 10.1128/IAI.00168-12 22615249 PMC3434585
Levin M Franklin EC Frangione B Pras M 1972 The amino acid sequence of a major nonimmunoglobulin component of some amyloid fibrils The Journal of Clinical Investigation 51 2773 2776 10.1172/JCI107098 5056669 PMC332979
Levin S Almo SC Satir BH 1999 Functional diversity of the phosphoglucomutase superfamily: structural implications Protein Engineering 12 737 746 10.1093/protein/12.9.737 10506283
Levine TP 2019 Remote homology searches identify bacterial homologues of eukaryotic lipid transfer proteins, including Chorein-N domains in TamB and AsmA and Mdm31p BMC Molecular and Cell Biology 20 43 10.1186/s12860-019-0226-z 31607262 PMC6791001
Liu J Mushegian A 2003 Three monophyletic superfamilies account for the majority of the known glycosyltransferases Protein Science 12 1418 1431 10.1110/ps.0302103 12824488 PMC2323934
Liu X Zeng J Chen X Xie W 2016 Crystal structures of RidA, an important enzyme for the prevention of toxic side products Scientific Reports 6 30494 10.1038/srep30494 27458092 PMC4960622
Lo YC Lin SC Shaw JF Liaw YC 2003 Crystal structure of Escherichia coli thioesterase I/protease I/lysophospholipase L1: consensus sequence blocks constitute the catalytic center of SGNH-hydrolases through a conserved hydrogen bond network Journal of Molecular Biology 330 539 551 10.1016/s0022-2836(03)00637-5 12842470
Logan CY Nusse R 2004 The Wnt signaling pathway in development and disease Annual Review of Cell and Developmental Biology 20 781 810 10.1146/annurev.cellbio.20.010403.113126 15473860
MacKenzie DA Tailford LE Hemmings AM Juge N 2009 Crystal structure of a mucus-binding protein repeat reveals an unexpected functional immunoglobulin binding activity The Journal of Biological Chemistry 284 32444 32453 10.1074/jbc.M109.040907 19758995 PMC2781659
Mans BJ Anantharaman V Aravind L Koonin EV 2004 Comparative genomics, evolution and origins of the nuclear envelope and nuclear pore complex Cell Cycle 3 1612 1637 10.4161/cc.3.12.1316 15611647
Massière F Badet-Denisot MA 1998 The mechanism of glutamine-dependent amidotransferases Cellular and Molecular Life Sciences 54 205 222 10.1007/s000180050145 9575335 PMC11147313
Mengin-Lecreulx D van Heijenoort J 1993 Identification of the glmU gene encoding N-acetylglucosamine-1-phosphate uridyltransferase in Escherichia coli Journal of Bacteriology 175 6150 6157 10.1128/jb.175.19.6150-6157.1993 8407787 PMC206709
Mengin-Lecreulx D van Heijenoort J 1996 Characterization of the essential gene glmM encoding phosphoglucosamine mutase in Escherichia coli The Journal of Biological Chemistry 271 32 39 10.1074/jbc.271.1.32 8550580
Meyer B Wurm JP Sharma S Immer C Pogoryelov D Kötter P Lafontaine DLJ Wöhnert J Entian K-D 2016 Ribosome biogenesis factor Tsr3 is the aminocarboxypropyl transferase responsible for 18S rRNA hypermodification in yeast and humans Nucleic Acids Research 44 4304 4316 10.1093/nar/gkw244 27084949 PMC4872110
Minh BQ Schmidt HA Chernomor O Schrempf D Woodhams MD von Haeseler A Lanfear R 2020 IQ-TREE 2: new models and efficient methods for phylogenetic inference in the genomic era Molecular Biology and Evolution 37 1530 1534 10.1093/molbev/msaa015 32011700 PMC7182206
Miyata N Kuge O 2021 Topology of phosphatidylserine synthase 1 in the endoplasmic reticulum membrane Protein Science 30 2346 2353 10.1002/pro.4182 34516042 PMC8521306
Monzingo AF Marcotte EM Hart PJ Robertus JD 1996 Chitinases, chitosanases, and lysozymes can be divided into procaryotic and eucaryotic families sharing a conserved core Nature Structural Biology 3 133 140 10.1038/nsb0296-133 8564539
Morata G Lawrence PA 1977 The development of wingless, a homeotic mutation of Drosophila Developmental Biology 56 227 240 10.1016/0012-1606(77)90266-4 849798
Morrow JF Stearman RS Peltzman CG Potter DA 1981 Induction of hepatic synthesis of serum amyloid A protein and actin PNAS 78 4718 4722 10.1073/pnas.78.8.4718 6946420 PMC320234
Mostowy RJ Holt KE 2018 Diversity-generating machines: genetics of bacterial sugar-coating Trends in Microbiology 26 1008 1021 10.1016/j.tim.2018.06.006 30037568 PMC6249986
Muley VY Akhter Y Galande S 2019 PDZ domains across the microbial world: molecular link to the proteases, stress response, and protein synthesis Genome Biology and Evolution 11 644 659 10.1093/gbe/evz023 30698789 PMC6411480
Murzin AG 1993 OB(oligonucleotide/oligosaccharide binding)-fold: common structural and functional solution for non-homologous sequences The EMBO Journal 12 861 867 10.1002/j.1460-2075.1993.tb05726.x 8458342 PMC413284
Mutschler H Gebhardt M Shoeman RL Meinhart A 2011 A novel mechanism of programmed cell death in bacteria by toxin-antitoxin systems corrupts peptidoglycan synthesis PLOS Biology 9 e1001033 10.1371/journal.pbio.1001033 21445328 PMC3062530
Narita S Tokuda H 2010 Sorting of bacterial lipoproteins to the outer membrane by the Lol system Methods in Molecular Biology 619 117 129 10.1007/978-1-60327-412-8_7 20419407
Neuwald AF 1997 An unexpected structural relationship between integral membrane phosphatases and soluble haloperoxidases Protein Science 6 1764 1767 10.1002/pro.5560060817 9260289 PMC2143768
Notenboom V Boraston AB Kilburn DG Rose DR 2001 Crystal structures of the family 9 carbohydrate-binding module from Thermotoga maritima xylanase 10A in native and ligand-bound forms Biochemistry 40 6248 6256 10.1021/bi0101704 11371186
Novinec M Lenarčič B 2013 Papain-like peptidases: structure, function, and evolution Biomolecular Concepts 4 287 308 10.1515/bmc-2012-0054 25436581
Nusse R Varmus HE 1982 Many tumors induced by the mouse mammary tumor virus contain a provirus integrated in the same region of the host genome Cell 31 99 109 10.1016/0092-8674(82)90409-3 6297757
Nusse R Varmus HE 1992 Wnt genes Cell 69 1073 1087 10.1016/0092-8674(92)90630-u 1617723
Oke M Sarra R Ghirlando R Farnaud S Gorringe AR Evans RW Buchanan SK 2004 The plug domain of a neisserial TonB-dependent transporter retains structural integrity in the absence of its transmembrane beta-barrel FEBS Letters 564 294 300 10.1016/S0014-5793(04)00196-6 15111112
Palomeque-Messia P Englebert S Leyh-Bouille M Nguyen-Distèche M Duez C Houba S Dideberg O Van Beeumen J Ghuysen JM 1991 Amino acid sequence of the penicillin-binding protein/DD-peptidase of Streptomyces K15. Predicted secondary structures of the low Mr penicillin-binding proteins of class A The Biochemical Journal 279 ( Pt 1) 223 230 10.1042/bj2790223 1930140 PMC1151569
Pares S Cohen-Addad C Sieker L Neuburger M Douce R 1994 X-ray structure determination at 2.6-A resolution of a lipoate-containing protein: the H-protein of the glycine decarboxylase complex from pea leaves PNAS 91 4850 4853 10.1073/pnas.91.11.4850 8197146 PMC43886
Pellicer MT Badía J Aguilar J Baldomà L 1996 glc locus of Escherichia coli: characterization of genes encoding the subunits of glycolate oxidase and the glc regulator protein Journal of Bacteriology 178 2051 2059 10.1128/jb.178.7.2051-2059.1996 8606183 PMC177904
Price MN Dehal PS Arkin AP 2010 FastTree 2--approximately maximum-likelihood trees for large alignments PLOS ONE 5 e9490 10.1371/journal.pone.0009490 20224823 PMC2835736
Prosswimmer T Heng A Daggett V 2024 Mechanistic insights into the role of amyloid-β in innate immunity Scientific Reports 14 5376 10.1038/s41598-024-55423-9 38438446 PMC10912764
Qi Y Grishin NV 2005 Structural classification of thioredoxin-like fold proteins Proteins 58 376 388 10.1002/prot.20329 15558583
Raetz CR Kennedy EP 1974 Partial purification and properties of phosphatidylserine synthetase from Escherichia coli The Journal of Biological Chemistry 249 5083 5145 4604873
Rahlwes KC Ha SA Motooka D Mayfield JA Baumoel LR Strickland JN Torres-Ocampo AP Nakamura S Morita YS 2017 The cell envelope-associated phospholipid-binding protein LmeA is required for mannan polymerization in mycobacteria The Journal of Biological Chemistry 292 17407 17417 10.1074/jbc.M117.804377 28855252 PMC5655517
Rahn A Beis K Naismith JH Whitfield C 2003 A novel outer membrane protein, Wzi, is involved in surface assembly of the Escherichia coli K30 group 1 capsule Journal of Bacteriology 185 5882 5890 10.1128/JB.185.19.5882-5890.2003 13129961 PMC193962
Rai AK Mitchell AM 2020 Enterobacterial common antigen: synthesis and function of an enigmatic molecule mBio 11 11 10.1128/mBio.01914-20 PMC7439462 32788387
Rai AK Carr JF Bautista DE Wang W Mitchell AM 2021 ElyC and cyclic enterobacterial common antigen regulate synthesis of phosphoglyceride-linked enterobacterial common antigen mBio 12 e0284621 10.1128/mBio.02846-21 34809459 PMC8609368
Ramachandran R Hartmann C Song HK Huber R Bochtler M 2002 Functional interactions of HslV (ClpQ) with the ATPase HslU (ClpY) PNAS 99 7396 7401 10.1073/pnas.102188799 12032294 PMC124242
Ravi J Anantharaman V Chen SZ Brenner EP Datta P Aravind L Gennaro ML 2024 The phage shock protein (PSP) envelope stress response: discovery of novel partners and evolutionary history mSystems 9 e0084723 10.1128/msystems.00847-23 38809013 PMC11237479
Razew A Schwarz JN Mitkowski P Sabala I Kaus-Drobek M 2022 One fold, many functions-M23 family of peptidoglycan hydrolases Frontiers in Microbiology 13 1036964 10.3389/fmicb.2022.1036964 36386627 PMC9662197
Řezanka T Kyselová L Murphy DJ 2023 Archaeal lipids Progress in Lipid Research 91 101237 10.1016/j.plipres.2023.101237 37236370
Richards GS Degnan BM 2009 The dawn of developmental signaling in the metazoa Cold Spring Harbor Symposia on Quantitative Biology 74 81 90 10.1101/sqb.2009.74.028 19903747
Rigden DJ 2005 Analysis of glycoside hydrolase family 98: catalytic machinery, mechanism and a novel putative carbohydrate binding module FEBS Letters 579 5466 5472 10.1016/j.febslet.2005.09.011 16212961
Rijsewijk F Schuermann M Wagenaar E Parren P Weigel D Nusse R 1987 The Drosophila homolog of the mouse mammary oncogene int-1 is identical to the segment polarity gene wingless Cell 50 649 657 10.1016/0092-8674(87)90038-9 3111720
Rouse SL Matthews SJ Dueholm MS 2018 Ecology and biogenesis of functional amyloids in Pseudomonas Journal of Molecular Biology 430 3685 3695 10.1016/j.jmb.2018.05.004 29753779 PMC6173800
Ruhe ZC Nguyen JY Xiong J Koskiniemi S Beck CM Perkins BR Low DA Hayes CS 2017 CdiA effectors use modular receptor-binding domains to recognize target bacteria mBio 8 e00290-17 10.1128/mBio.00290-17 28351921 PMC5371414
Ruhe ZC Low DA Hayes CS 2020 Polymorphic toxins and their immunity proteins: diversity, evolution, and mechanisms of delivery Annual Review of Microbiology 74 497 520 10.1146/annurev-micro-020518-115638 32680451 PMC8019152
Ruiz N 2008 Bioinformatics identification of MurJ (MviN) as the peptidoglycan lipid II flippase in Escherichia coli PNAS 105 15553 15557 10.1073/pnas.0808352105 18832143 PMC2563115
Ruiz N 2015 Lipid flippases for bacterial peptidoglycan biosynthesis Lipid Insights 8 21 31 10.4137/LPI.S31783 26792999 PMC4714577
Sack GH Talbot CC Seuanez H O’Brien SJ 1989 Molecular analysis of the human serum amyloid A (SAA) gene family Scandinavian Journal of Immunology 29 113 119 10.1111/j.1365-3083.1989.tb01105.x 2564214
Sack GH Jr 2018 Serum amyloid A - a review Molecular Medicine 24 46 10.1186/s10020-018-0047-0 30165816 PMC6117975
Saiki K Konishi K 2007 Identification of a Porphyromonas gingivalis novel protein sov required for the secretion of gingipains Microbiology and Immunology 51 483 491 10.1111/j.1348-0421.2007.tb03936.x 17579257
Saito K Kuge O Akamatsu Y Nishijima M 1996 Immunochemical identification of the pssA gene product as phosphatidylserine synthase I of Chinese hamster ovary cells FEBS Letters 395 262 266 10.1016/0014-5793(96)01049-6 8898108
Sánchez-Pulido L Devos D Genevrois S Vicente M Valencia A 2003 POTRA: a conserved domain in the FtsQ family and a class of beta-barrel outer membrane proteins Trends in Biochemical Sciences 28 523 526 10.1016/j.tibs.2003.08.003 14559180
Sandmann G Misawa N 1992 New functional assignment of the carotenogenic genes crtB and crtE with constructs of these genes from Erwinia species FEMS Microbiology Letters 69 253 257 10.1016/0378-1097(92)90656-9 1555761
Sankaran K Wu HC 1994 Lipid modification of bacterial prolipoprotein. Transfer of diacylglyceryl moiety from phosphatidylglycerol The Journal of Biological Chemistry 269 19701 19706 8051048
Santelli E Liddington RC Mohan MA Hoch JA Szurmant H 2007 The crystal structure of Bacillus subtilis YycI reveals a common fold for two members of an unusual class of sensor histidine kinase regulatory proteins Journal of Bacteriology 189 3290 3295 10.1128/JB.01937-06 17307848 PMC1855859
Satchell KJF 2011 Structure and function of MARTX toxins and other large repetitive RTX proteins Annual Review of Microbiology 65 71 90 10.1146/annurev-micro-090110-102943 21639783
Sato Y Yamamoto Y Kizaki H 1997 Cloning and sequence analysis of the gbpC gene encoding a novel glucan-binding protein of Streptococcus mutans Infection and Immunity 65 668 675 10.1128/iai.65.2.668-675.1997 9009329 PMC176112
Savidov N Gloriozova TA Poroikov VV Dembitsky VM 2018 Highly oxygenated isoprenoid lipids derived from fungi and fungal endophytes: Origin and biological activities Steroids 140 114 124 10.1016/j.steroids.2018.10.006 30326211
Sayers EW Bolton EE Brister JR Canese K Chan J Comeau DC Connor R Funk K Kelly C Kim S Madej T Marchler-Bauer A Lanczycki C Lathrop S Lu Z Thibaud-Nissen F Murphy T Phan L Skripchenko Y Tse T Wang J Williams R Trawick BW Pruitt KD Sherry ST 2022 Database resources of the national center for biotechnology information Nucleic Acids Research 50 D20 D26 10.1093/nar/gkab1112 34850941 PMC8728269
Schäffer AA Wolf YI Ponting CP Koonin EV Aravind L Altschul SF 1999 IMPALA: matching a protein sequence against a collection of PSI-BLAST-constructed position-specific score matrices Bioinformatics 15 1000 1011 10.1093/bioinformatics/15.12.1000 10745990
Schleiffer A Kaitna S Maurer-Stroh S Glotzer M Nasmyth K Eisenhaber F 2003 Kleisins: a superfamily of bacterial and eukaryotic SMC protein partners Molecular Cell 11 571 575 10.1016/s1097-2765(03)00108-4 12667442
Schmid M Uhlenhaut NH Godard F Demar M Bressan R Weigel D Lohmann JU 2003 Dissection of floral induction pathways using global expression analysis Development 130 6001 6012 10.1242/dev.00842 14573523
Schneider T Senn MM Berger-Bächi B Tossi A Sahl H-G Wiedemann I 2004 In vitro assembly of a complete, pentaglycine interpeptide bridge containing cell wall precursor (lipid II-Gly5) of Staphylococcus aureus Molecular Microbiology 53 675 685 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2004.04149.x 15228543
Schreiter ER Drennan CL 2007 Ribbon-helix-helix transcription factors: variations on a theme Nature Reviews. Microbiology 5 710 720 10.1038/nrmicro1717 17676053
Schulte G Bryja V 2007 The Frizzled family of unconventional G-protein-coupled receptors Trends in Pharmacological Sciences 28 518 525 10.1016/j.tips.2007.09.001 17884187
Seed KD Faruque SM Mekalanos JJ Calderwood SB Qadri F Camilli A 2012 Phase variable O antigen biosynthetic genes control expression of the major protective antigen and bacteriophage receptor in Vibrio cholerae O1 PLOS Pathogens 8 e1002917 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002917 23028317 PMC3441752
Segalen M Bellaïche Y 2009 Cell division orientation and planar cell polarity pathways Seminars in Cell & Developmental Biology 20 972 977 10.1016/j.semcdb.2009.03.018 19447051
Sehnal D Bittrich S Deshpande M Svobodová R Berka K Bazgier V Velankar S Burley SK Koča J Rose AS 2021 Mol* Viewer: modern web app for 3D visualization and analysis of large biomolecular structures Nucleic Acids Research 49 W431 W437 10.1093/nar/gkab314 33956157 PMC8262734
Šesták Z Britton G Liaaen-Jensen S Pfander H 2004 Carotenoids Handbook Photosynthetica 10.1023/B:PHOT.0000040641.40049.19
Shah C Hari-Dass R Raynes JG 2006 Serum amyloid A is an innate immune opsonin for Gram-negative bacteria Blood 108 1751 1757 10.1182/blood-2005-11-011932 16735604
Sham LT Butler EK Lebar MD Kahne D Bernhardt TG Ruiz N 2014 Bacterial cell wall: MurJ is the flippase of lipid-linked precursors for peptidoglycan biogenesis Science 345 220 222 10.1126/science.1254522 25013077 PMC4163187
Sharma RP 1973 Wingless a new mutant in Drosophila melanogaster Drosophila Information Service
Shultis DD Purdy MD Banchs CN Wiener MC 2006 Outer membrane active transport: structure of the BtuB:TonB complex Science 312 1396 1399 10.1126/science.1127694 16741124
Slusarski DC Pelegri F 2007 Calcium signaling in vertebrate embryonic patterning and morphogenesis Developmental Biology 307 1 13 10.1016/j.ydbio.2007.04.043 17531967 PMC2729314
Söding J Biegert A Lupas AN 2005 The HHpred interactive server for protein homology detection and structure prediction Nucleic Acids Research 33 W244 W248 10.1093/nar/gki408 15980461 PMC1160169
Soppa J Kobayashi K Noirot-Gros MF Oesterhelt D Ehrlich SD Dervyn E Ogasawara N Moriya S 2002 Discovery of two novel families of proteins that are proposed to interact with prokaryotic SMC proteins, and characterization of the Bacillus subtilis family members ScpA and ScpB Molecular Microbiology 45 59 71 10.1046/j.1365-2958.2002.03012.x 12100548
Steinegger M Meier M Mirdita M Vöhringer H Haunsberger SJ Söding J 2019 HH-suite3 for fast remote homology detection and deep protein annotation BMC Bioinformatics 20 473 10.1186/s12859-019-3019-7 31521110 PMC6744700
Stogios PJ Savchenko A 2020 Molecular mechanisms of vancomycin resistance Protein Science 29 654 669 10.1002/pro.3819 31899563 PMC7020976
Stone SJ Vance JE 1999 Cloning and expression of murine liver phosphatidylserine synthase (PSS)-2: differential regulation of phospholipid metabolism by PSS1 and PSS2 The Biochemical Journal 342 (Pt 1) 57 64 10432300 PMC1220436
Stone SJ Vance JE 2000 Phosphatidylserine synthase-1 and -2 are localized to mitochondria-associated membranes Journal of Biological Chemistry 275 34534 34540 10.1074/jbc.M002865200 10938271
Storck EM Özbalci C Eggert US 2018 Lipid cell biology: a focus on lipids in cell division Annual Review of Biochemistry 87 839 869 10.1146/annurev-biochem-062917-012448 29494237
Stukey J Carman GM 1997 Identification of a novel phosphatase sequence motif Protein Science 6 469 472 10.1002/pro.5560060226 9041652 PMC2143653
Sun L Ye RD 2016 Serum amyloid A1: Structure, function and gene polymorphism Gene 583 48 57 10.1016/j.gene.2016.02.044 26945629 PMC5683722
Suplatov DA Besenmatter W Svedas VK Svendsen A 2012 Bioinformatic analysis of α/β-hydrolase fold enzymes reveals subfamily-specific positions responsible for discrimination of amidase and lipase activities Protein Engineering, Design & Selection 25 689 697 10.1093/protein/gzs068 23043134
Sur VP Mazumdar A Vimberg V Stefani T Androvic L Kracikova L Laga R Kamenik Z Komrskova K 2021 Specific inhibition of VanZ-mediated resistance to lipoglycopeptide antibiotics International Journal of Molecular Sciences 23 97 10.3390/ijms23010097 35008521 PMC8744867
Suresh Kumar A Mody K Jha B 2007 Bacterial exopolysaccharides – a perception Journal of Basic Microbiology 47 103 117 10.1002/jobm.200610203 17440912
Takada R Satomi Y Kurata T Ueno N Norioka S Kondoh H Takao T Takada S 2006 Monounsaturated fatty acid modification of Wnt protein: its role in Wnt secretion Developmental Cell 11 791 801 10.1016/j.devcel.2006.10.003 17141155
Tan BK Bogdanov M Zhao J Dowhan W Raetz CRH Guan Z 2012 Discovery of a cardiolipin synthase utilizing phosphatidylethanolamine and phosphatidylglycerol as substrates PNAS 109 16504 16509 10.1073/pnas.1212797109 22988102 PMC3478633
Tchen TT 1958 Mevalonic kinase: purification and properties The Journal of Biological Chemistry 233 1100 1103 13598740
Tjalsma H Zanen G Venema G Bron S van Dijl JM 1999 The potential active site of the lipoprotein-specific (type II) signal peptidase of Bacillus subtilis The Journal of Biological Chemistry 274 28191 28197 10.1074/jbc.274.40.28191 10497172
Tokuda H Matsuyama S-I 2004 Sorting of lipoproteins to the outer membrane in E. coli Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1693 5 13 10.1016/j.bbamcr.2004.02.005 15276320
Tomohiro S Kawaguti A Kawabe Y Kitada S Kuge O 2009 Purification and characterization of human phosphatidylserine synthases 1 and 2 The Biochemical Journal 418 421 429 10.1042/BJ20081597 19014349
Traag VA Waltman L van Eck NJ 2019 From Louvain to Leiden: guaranteeing well-connected communities Scientific Reports 9 5233 10.1038/s41598-019-41695-z 30914743 PMC6435756
Tran UC Clarke CF 2007 Endogenous synthesis of coenzyme Q in eukaryotes Mitochondrion 7 Suppl S62 S71 10.1016/j.mito.2007.03.007 17482885 PMC1974887
Tükel C Wilson RP Nishimori JH Pezeshki M Chromy BA Bäumler AJ 2009 Responses to amyloids of microbial and host origin are mediated through toll-like receptor 2 Cell Host & Microbe 6 45 53 10.1016/j.chom.2009.05.020 19616765 PMC2745191
Turk V Bode W 1991 The cystatins: protein inhibitors of cysteine proteinases FEBS Letters 285 213 219 10.1016/0014-5793(91)80804-c 1855589
Ueta M Ohniwa RL Yoshida H Maki Y Wada C Wada A 2008 Role of HPF (hibernation promoting factor) in translational activity in Escherichia coli Journal of Biochemistry 143 425 433 10.1093/jb/mvm243 18174192
Uhlar CM Burgess CJ Sharp PM Whitehead AS 1994 Evolution of the serum amyloid A (SAA) protein superfamily Genomics 19 228 235 10.1006/geno.1994.1052 8188253
Vance JE 2018 Historical perspective: phosphatidylserine and phosphatidylethanolamine from the 1800s to the present Journal of Lipid Research 59 923 944 10.1194/jlr.R084004 29661786 PMC5983396
van Heijenoort J 2001 Formation of the glycan chains in the synthesis of bacterial peptidoglycan Glycobiology 11 25R 36R 10.1093/glycob/11.3.25r 11320055
van Heijenoort J 2007 Lipid intermediates in the biosynthesis of bacterial peptidoglycan Microbiology and Molecular Biology Reviews 71 620 635 10.1128/MMBR.00016-07 18063720 PMC2168651
van Kempen M Kim SS Tumescheit C Mirdita M Lee J Gilchrist CLM Söding J Steinegger M 2024 Fast and accurate protein structure search with Foldseek Nature Biotechnology 42 243 246 10.1038/s41587-023-01773-0 37156916 PMC10869269
van Tienen LM Mieszczanek J Fiedler M Rutherford TJ Bienz M 2017 Constitutive scaffolding of multiple Wnt enhanceosome components by Legless/BCL9 eLife 6 e20882 10.7554/eLife.20882 28296634 PMC5352222
Vershinin A 1999 Biological functions of carotenoids--diversity and evolution BioFactors 10 99 104 10.1002/biof.5520100203 10609869
Virtanen P Wäneskog M Koskiniemi S 2019 Class II contact-dependent growth inhibition (CDI) systems allow for broad-range cross-species toxin delivery within the Enterobacteriaceae family Molecular Microbiology 111 1109 1125 10.1111/mmi.14214 30710431 PMC6850196
Weckener M Woodward LS Clarke BR Liu H Ward PN Le Bas A Bhella D Whitfield C Naismith JH 2023 The lipid linked oligosaccharide polymerase Wzy and its regulating co-polymerase, Wzz, from enterobacterial common antigen biosynthesis form a complex Open Biology 13 220373 10.1098/rsob.220373 36944376 PMC10030265
Welters HJ Kulkarni RN 2008 Wnt signaling: relevance to beta-cell biology and diabetes Trends in Endocrinology and Metabolism 19 349 355 10.1016/j.tem.2008.08.004 18926717
West AH Stock AM 2001 Histidine kinases and response regulator proteins in two-component signaling systems Trends in Biochemical Sciences 26 369 376 10.1016/s0968-0004(01)01852-7 11406410
Whisstock JC Romero S Gurung R Nandurkar H Ooms LM Bottomley SP Mitchell CA 2000 The inositol polyphosphate 5-phosphatases and the apurinic/apyrimidinic base excision repair endonucleases share a common mechanism for catalysis The Journal of Biological Chemistry 275 37055 37061 10.1074/jbc.M006244200 10962003
Whitney JC Peterson SB Kim J Pazos M Verster AJ Radey MC Kulasekara HD Ching MQ Bullen NP Bryant D Goo YA Surette MG Borenstein E Vollmer W Mougous JD 2017 A broadly distributed toxin family mediates contact-dependent antagonism between gram-positive bacteria eLife 6 e26938 10.7554/eLife.26938 28696203 PMC5555719
Williams AF Barclay AN 1988 The immunoglobulin superfamily--domains for cell surface recognition Annual Review of Immunology 6 381 405 10.1146/annurev.iy.06.040188.002121 3289571
Wimley WC 2003 The versatile beta-barrel membrane protein Current Opinion in Structural Biology 13 404 411 10.1016/s0959-440x(03)00099-x 12948769
Wolff M Seemann M Tse Sum Bui B Frapart Y Tritsch D Garcia Estrabot A Rodríguez-Concepción M Boronat A Marquet A Rohmer M 2003 Isoprenoid biosynthesis via the methylerythritol phosphate pathway: the (E)-4-hydroxy-3-methylbut-2-enyl diphosphate reductase (LytB/IspH) from Escherichia coli is a [4Fe-4S] protein FEBS Letters 541 115 120 10.1016/s0014-5793(03)00317-x 12706830
Wong LH Levine TP 2017 Tubular lipid binding proteins (TULIPs) growing everywhere Biochimica et Biophysica Acta. Molecular Cell Research 1864 1439 1449 10.1016/j.bbamcr.2017.05.019 28554774 PMC5507252
Woods EC Wetzel D Mukerjee M McBride SM 2018 Examination of the clostridioides (clostridium) difficile VanZ ortholog, CD1240 Anaerobe 53 108 115 10.1016/j.anaerobe.2018.06.013 29940245 PMC6309587
Wright GD Molinas C Arthur M Courvalin P Walsh CT 1992 Characterization of vanY, a DD-carboxypeptidase from vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus faecium BM4147 Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy 36 1514 1518 10.1128/AAC.36.7.1514 1510448 PMC191613
Wu HY Liu MS Lin TP Cheng YS 2011 Structural and functional assays of AtTLP18.3 identify its novel acid phosphatase activity in thylakoid lumen Plant Physiology 157 1015 1025 10.1104/pp.111.184739 21908686 PMC3252143
Yau KW 1994 Cyclic nucleotide-gated channels: an expanding new family of ion channels PNAS 91 3481 3483 10.1073/pnas.91.9.3481 7513422 PMC43603
Yeow J Chng SS 2022 Of zones, bridges and chaperones - phospholipid transport in bacterial outer membrane assembly and homeostasis Microbiology 168 1177 10.1099/mic.0.001177 35384832
Yunck R Cho H Bernhardt TG 2016 Identification of MltG as a potential terminase for peptidoglycan polymerization in bacteria Molecular Microbiology 99 700 718 10.1111/mmi.13258 26507882 PMC4752859
Zámocký M Ferianc P 2023 Discovering the deep evolutionary roots of serum amyloid A protein family International Journal of Biological Macromolecules 252 126537 10.1016/j.ijbiomac.2023.126537 37634776
Zhang Y van der Fits L Voerman JS Melief M-J Laman JD Wang M Wang H Wang M Li X Walls CD Gupta D Dziarski R 2005 Identification of serum N-acetylmuramoyl-l-alanine amidase as liver peptidoglycan recognition protein 2 Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1752 34 46 10.1016/j.bbapap.2005.07.001 16054449
Zhang D Iyer LM Aravind L 2011 A novel immunity system for bacterial nucleic acid degrading toxins and its recruitment in various eukaryotic and DNA viral systems Nucleic Acids Research 39 4532 4552 10.1093/nar/gkr036 21306995 PMC3113570
Zhang D de Souza RF Anantharaman V Iyer LM Aravind L 2012 Polymorphic toxin systems: Comprehensive characterization of trafficking modes, processing, mechanisms of action, immunity and ecology using comparative genomics Biology Direct 7 18 10.1186/1745-6150-7-18 22731697 PMC3482391
Zhang D Iyer LM Burroughs AM Aravind L 2014 Resilience of biochemical activity in protein domains in the face of structural divergence Current Opinion in Structural Biology 26 92 103 10.1016/j.sbi.2014.05.008 24952217 PMC5915356
Zhang C Kelkar A Nasirikenari M Lau JTY Sveinsson M Sharma UC Pokharel S Neelamegham S 2018 The physical spacing between the von Willebrand factor D’D3 and A1 domains regulates platelet adhesion in vitro and in vivo Journal of Thrombosis and Haemostasis 16 571 582 10.1111/jth.13927 29251812 PMC5826847
Zhao G London E 2006 An amino acid “transmembrane tendency” scale that approaches the theoretical limit to accuracy for prediction of transmembrane helices: relationship to biological hydrophobicity Protein Science 15 1987 2001 10.1110/ps.062286306 16877712 PMC2242586
Zhong Q Zhao Y Ye F Xiao Z Huang G Xu M Zhang Y Zhan X Sun K Wang Z Cheng S Feng S Zhao X Zhang J Lu P Xu W Zhou Q Ma D 2021 Cryo-EM structure of human Wntless in complex with Wnt3a Nature Communications 12 4541 10.1038/s41467-021-24731-3 34315898 PMC8316347
