The determinants of fertility among Australian Aborigines.

This paper concerns the determinants of fertility of precontact Australian Aborigine women. Emphasis
is placed on social organization as well as the physical environment and considerations of
adaptation. The key to understanding the fertility of Australian Aborigines is the structural
tension evident in male-female relations. Ethnographic data on hunter-gatherers fertility indicate a
low fertility rate, e.g. 4.7-5.2 live births/woman for the Kung. Traditional Aboriginal
physiological fertility was also low if infant mortality is separated from infertility. Past studies
of population and transition theory in pre-contact situations have attributed increase in population
to reduction in mortality. This paper suggests that there must have been an increase in the birth
rate. Factors affecting ovulation, conception, and parturition are examined for traditional
Aboriginal populations. Ovulation is affected by nutrition, lactation, and introcision. Lack of body
fat in women causes anovulation due to insufficent energy reserves. Increased fertility appears to
be a greatly reduced energy expenditure and an increased carbohydrate intake leading to a build up
of body weight. Pre-contact Aboriginal fertility was low because of a low caloric intake and a high
energy expenditure. Prolonged lactation does not seem to cause birth spacing. The actual length of
time after parturition appears to be an independent cause of reduced prolactin, and of
reestablishment of ovulation. Stress and anxiety are factors which could reduce fertility by causing
anovulation in women and/or reduced sperm counts in men. Contraception is affected by coital
frequency and male fertility. Aboriginal coital frequency may have been affected by the lack of
privacy and competition of a co-wife. Gestation is affected by spontaneous abortion, sterility, and
foetal wastage. Harsh conditions of traditional Aborigines may have affected their ability to
conceive. Voluntary controls on fertility for Aborigines include rituals, avoidance of coitus,
taking medicines, abortion, and infanticide. Low fertility of precontact aborigines is accounted for
by diet and energy expenditure, with limited coital frequency and foetal wastage as probable
contributing factors. Fallopian tube blockage could account for the high rate of infertility of
women. Social organization, values, and beliefs are important to take into account.