Ecogenomics and potential biogeochemical impacts of globally abundant ocean viruses.

Ocean microbes drive biogeochemical cycling on a global scale. However, this cycling is constrained
by viruses that affect community composition, metabolic activity, and evolutionary trajectories.
Owing to challenges with the sampling and cultivation of viruses, genome-level viral diversity
remains poorly described and grossly understudied, with less than 1% of observed surface-ocean
viruses known. Here we assemble complete genomes and large genomic fragments from both surface- and
deep-ocean viruses sampled during the Tara Oceans and Malaspina research expeditions, and analyse
the resulting 'global ocean virome' dataset to present a global map of abundant, double-stranded DNA
viruses complete with genomic and ecological contexts. A total of 15,222 epipelagic and mesopelagic
viral populations were identified, comprising 867 viral clusters (defined as approximately genus-
level groups). This roughly triples the number of known ocean viral populations and doubles the
number of candidate bacterial and archaeal virus genera, providing a near-complete sampling of
epipelagic communities at both the population and viral-cluster level. We found that 38 of the 867
viral clusters were locally or globally abundant, together accounting for nearly half of the viral
populations in any global ocean virome sample. While two-thirds of these clusters represent newly
described viruses lacking any cultivated representative, most could be computationally linked to
dominant, ecologically relevant microbial hosts. Moreover, we identified 243 viral-encoded auxiliary
metabolic genes, of which only 95 were previously known. Deeper analyses of four of these auxiliary
metabolic genes (dsrC, soxYZ, P-II (also known as glnB) and amoC) revealed that abundant viruses may
directly manipulate sulfur and nitrogen cycling throughout the epipelagic ocean. This viral catalog
and functional analyses provide a necessary foundation for the meaningful integration of viruses
into ecosystem models where they act as key players in nutrient cycling and trophic networks.