Incorporation of Cryptic Plasmid Energetics Improves Genome-Scale Metabolic Predictions in Probiotic E. coli Nissle 1917.

Escherichia coli Nissle 1917 (EcN) is a well-characterized Gram-negative probiotic distinguished by
its unique, strain-specific physiology. Genome-scale metabolic models (GEMs) are powerful tools for
elucidating metabolic traits and predicting genotype-phenotype relationships. Although several EcN
GEMs have been published, none have explicitly exploited its probiotic physiology. Here, we present
a plasmid-specific module that can be incorporated into EcN GEMs, which, for the first time,
considers the energetic costs associated with its cryptic plasmids. Using COBRA methodologies and
possibilistic metabolic flux analysis, we show how the plasmid-module inclusion improves biomass and
overall flux predictions in an additional, manually curated EcN model as well as in previous EcN
reconstructions. Then, the different EcN reconstructions were systematically compared to evaluate
the trade-off between model refinement depth and predictive performance. The analysis revealed that
once expanded to include the plasmid-related costs, increased level of curation in the different
GEMs does not necessarily enhance quantitative accuracy and that predictive reliability depends on
both computational methodology chosen and experimental contexts. Metabolomic profiling under gut
microbiota medium and anaerobic conditions further showed that EcN exhibits a distinctive metabolic
phenotype, characterized by elevated amino acid consumption and enhanced short-chain fatty acid
production, which is captured by the evaluated metabolic models. These findings highlight the unique
probiotic physiology of EcN and demonstrate the utility of metabolic modelling for reproducing and
exploring such traits. Overall, this study provides a quantitatively reliable and physiologically
relevant framework for modelling E. coli Nissle 1917 while considering its cryptic plasmids,
supporting advances in probiotic engineering, synthetic biology and bioprocess design.