The carbon starvation-inducible lipoprotein (Slp) influences differential adherence of Escherichia coli O157:H7 at the bovine rectoanal junction.

Shiga toxin-producing Escherichia coli O157:H7 (O157), a foodborne human pathogen, persists at the
rectoanal junction (RAJ) of the bovine intestinal tract, in asymptomatic cattle reservoirs.
Identifying mechanisms used by O157 for initial adherence before persistence at the RAJ could help
develop effective O157 control modalities. We recently established the role of carbon starvation-
inducible lipoprotein (Slp) in initial adherence of O157 to Caco-2 cells, with the human polymeric
immunoglobulin receptor (pIgR) protein as the Slp-receptor. Here, we evaluated the role of Slp in
O157 adherence to the bovine RAJ using the RAJ squamous epithelial (RSE) cell- and RAJ-in vitro
Organ Culture (IVOC)- adherence assays. The wild-type O157 strain EDL932 (EDL932-WT), it's isogenic
slp deletion mutant (EDL932 Δslp), and the slp complemented mutant (EDL932 Δslp-p:slp), were tested
with no bacteria controls. Adherence was verified by culture and immunofluorescence (IF) staining of
O157. Tissue integrity was determined using nuclear/cell staining dyes and histopathological
examination. All test strains adhered in a diffuse-moderate pattern on RSE cells. However,
differential adherence was observed on the RAJ-IVOC with the strains preferentially adhering to the
columnar cells. Additionally, EDL932-WT and EDL932 Δslp-p:slp strains adhered in slightly greater
numbers than the EDL932 Δslp strain to the RAJ-IVOC, causing disruptions primarily in the columnar
region of otherwise intact RAJ-IVOC tissues. Interestingly, pIgR was also predominantly detected by
IF microscopy and RNAscope in situ hybridization at the columnar region of the RAJ-IVOC tissue. In
silico modeling demonstrated the possibility of a bovine pIgR- bacterial Slp interaction. Hence, our
observations support the role for Slp in the initial adherence of O157 to the columnar cells at the
bovine RAJ, unlike the squamous cells where the loss of slp did not impact attachment. In addition,
a possible mucosal immune-interference resulting from the bovine pIgR-Slp interaction may contribute
towards long-term O157 colonization of cattle.