
JOURNAL INFORMATION
==============================
NLM Title Abbreviation: Acta Pharm Sin B
Journal ID: Acta Pharm Sin B

Acta Pharmaceutica Sinica. B

ISSN: 2211-3835
EISSN: 2211-3843
Publisher: Elsevier

ARTICLE INFORMATION
==============================
PMCID: PMC13198248
DOI: 10.1016/j.apsb.2026.02.014
Article ID: S2211-3835(26)00119-X
Article version: 1
Subjects: Review

Non-viral delivery of genome-editing tools for treatment of genetic disorders

Yang Jiamin a †
Chen Yuxuan a b †
Chen Xiaohong chen1992@zju.edu.cn a c ⁎
Ping Yuan pingy@zju.edu.cn a b ⁎
a College of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310058, China
b Liangzhu Laboratory, Zhejiang University Medical Center, Hangzhou 311121, China
c Zhejiang Provincial Key Laboratory of Pancreatic Disease, MOE Joint International Research Laboratory of Pancreatic Diseases, The First Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou 310003, China
⁎ Corresponding authors. chen1992@zju.edu.cnpingy@zju.edu.cn† These authors made equal contributions to this work.

Print publication date: 2026 May
Electronic publication date: 2026 Feb 23
Volume: 16
Issue: 5
First page: 2903
Last page: 2928
Received 2024 Dec 17; Revised 2025 Feb 19; Accepted 2025 Jun 25
Copyright: © 2026 The Authors
Copyright year: 2026
License: This is an open access article under the CC BY license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
License URL: https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/

Keywords: Genetic diseases, Genome editing, Gene therapy, CRISPR-Cas, Non-viral delivery, Lipid nanoparticle, Virus-like particle, Selective organ targeting

==============================
Pathogenic mutations within protein-coding regions of genomic DNA can disrupt protein structure and lead to hereditary disorders. Genome-editing technologies, particularly those based on clustered, regularly interspaced, short palindromic repeats-associated protein (CRISPR-Cas), are promising therapeutic tools for correcting genetic abnormalities. To date, viral delivery vectors for genome-editing biomacromolecules have shown numerous promises in treating genetic disorders. However, safe viral delivery for genome-editing components remains challenging, largely due to the immunogenicity of viruses. As an alternative, non-viral delivery systems are emerging as a safer choice and may offer solutions to address the safety challenges. In this review, we first introduce CRISPR-Cas9-based genome editing tools and their delivery formats. Then, we outline the pathology of major genetic disorders and both preclinical and clinical approaches for these diseases by therapeutic genome editing, and provide an overview of current non-viral delivery strategies and their potential to overcome existing limitations. Finally, we discuss the current challenges and future outlooks of non-viral delivery of gene-editing components in treating genetic diseases.

Graphical abstract

Gene-editing systems can be delivered by five principal classes of non-viral vectors for the treatment of genetic diseases. Through rational engineering of delivery vehicles, gene-editing cargos can be directed to specific tissues, enabling precise therapy for diverse diseases.Image 1

1 Introduction

Mutations in the coding regions of genomic DNA can cause protein malfunction and constitute the basis of various genetic disorders (Table 1). Rare diseases affect an estimated 300 million people globally and are a major contributor to child mortality and disability, particularly in high-income countries1. A recent BabyDetect pilot project found that about 1.8% of newborns (71 out of 3847) had severe and rare genetic conditions, including 44 cases of glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency, 5 cases of cystic fibrosis (CF), 1 case of phenylketonuria (PKU), among others2. Despite decades of efforts, effective treatments that correct DNA-level mutations remain rare3. Recent advances in genome-editing technologies offer the potential to permanently correct genetic mutations, offering new treatment opportunities. Unlike conventional gene therapies that rely on transgene expression or RNA interference3, 4, 5, gene-editing technologies directly correct pathogenic mutations in the somatic cells. Several ex vivo and in vivo genome-editing therapeutics are currently in clinical trials for a broader spectrum of genetic diseases, including hereditary tyrosinemia type 1 (HT1) and transthyretin amyloidosis (ATTR) (Table 2). Three major categories of programmed nucleases—zinc-finger nucleases (ZFNs), transcription activator-like effector nucleases (TALENs), and clustered, regularly interspaced, short palindromic repeats (CRISPR) associated proteins (CRISPR-Cas)—have been extensively used to treat genetic disorders in various animal models6,7. More recently, new gene-editing tools such as base editors (BEs) and prime editors (PEs) have opened new avenues for robust gene editing in mammalian cells8, 9, 10.Table 1 An overview of genetic diseases introduced in this review.

Table 1Disease	Mutated gene	Pathogenic cause	Onset organ	
HT1	FAH	Accumulation of maleylacetoacetic acid and fumarylacetoacetic acid	Liver	
FH	LDLR, APOB, PCSK9	High levels of LDL-C in the blood	Liver	
ATTR	TTR	Misfolding and aggregation of TTR	Heart, liver	
HAE	SERPING1	Insufficient C1INH activity	Liver, skin, gastrointestinal tract	
PKU	PAH	Deficiency of the enzyme phenylalanine hydroxylase	Liver	
SP-B deficiency	SFTPB	SP-B deficiency	Lung	
CF	CFTR	Defective or absent CFTR protein	Lung, pancreas	
Mucopolysaccharidoses	IDUA, IDS	Deficiency of enzymes required for GAGs degradation within lysosomes	Skeletal system, central nervous system	
DMD	DMD	Deficiency of the dystrophin protein	Skeletal muscle	
LCA10	CEP290	Misfunction of photoreceptor cells	Retina	
HL	TMC1	Dysfunction of mechanically activated channels in hair cells	Ear	
FXS	FMR1	The loss of FMRP	Brain	
SCD	HBB	Production of abnormal hemoglobin S	Blood	
Abbreviations: ATTR, transthyretin amyloidosis; C1INH, C1 inhibitor; CF, cystic fibrosis; CFTR, cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator; DMD, Duchenne muscular dystrophy; FH, familial hypercholesterolemia; FMRP, fragile X mental retardation protein; FXS, fragile X syndrome; GAGs, glycosaminoglycans; HAE, hereditary angioedema; HL, hearing loss; HT1, hereditary tyrosinemia type 1; LCA10, Leber congenital amaurosis type 10; LDL-C, low-density-lipoprotein cholesterol; PKU, phenylketonuria; SCD, sickle cell disease; SP-B, surfactant protein B; TTR, transthyretin.

Table 2 Gene editing therapy in clinical trials for treating genetic disease.

Table 2Therapy	Disease	ClinicalTrials.gov identifier	Status	Vectors	In/ex vivo	
VERVE-101	Heterozygous FH	NCT05398029	Active, not recruiting	LNP	In vivo	
NTLA-2001	ATTR amyloidosis	NCT06128629	Recruiting	LNP	In vivo	
NTLA-2002	HAE	NCT05120830	Active, not recruiting	LNP	In vivo	
SB-318	MPS I	NCT05514249	Terminated	AAV2/6	In vivo	
SB-913	MPS II	NCT03041324	Terminated	AAV2/6	In vivo	
CRD-TMH-001	DMD	NCT05514249	Active, not recruiting	AAV9	In vivo	
EDIT-101	LCA10	NCT03872479	Active, not recruiting	AAV5	In vivo	
SB-FIX	Hemophilia B	NCT02695160	Terminated	AAV2/6	In vivo	
CTX001	Transfusion-dependent β-thalassemia	NCT03655678	Active, not recruiting	Electroporation	Ex vivo	
SCD	NCT05329649
NCT05477563	Recruiting	Ex vivo	
ET-01	Transfusion dependent β-thalassemia	NCT04925206	Active, not recruiting	Electroporation	Ex vivo	
BEAM-101	SCD	NCT05456880	Recruiting	Electroporation	Ex vivo	
β-thalassemia	NCT05456880	Recruiting	Ex vivo	
EDIT-301	Transfusion-dependent β-thalassemia	NCT05444894	Recruiting	Electroporation	Ex vivo	
ZVS203e	Retinitis pigmentosa	NCT05805007	Recruiting	rAAV	Ex vivo	
BRL-101	Transfusion-dependent β-thalassemia	NCT06298630	Not yet	Electroporation	Ex vivo	
Abbreviations: AAV, adeno-associated virus; ATTR, transthyretin amyloidosis; DMD, Duchenne muscular dystrophy; FH, familial hypercholesterolaemia; HAE, hereditary angio-oedema; LCA10, Leber congenital amaurosis type 10; LNP, lipid nanoparticle; MPS I, mucopolysaccharidosis type I; MPS II, mucopolysaccharidosis type II; rAAV, recombinant adeno-associated virus; SCD, sickle cell disease.

Effective treatment of genetic diseases requires the precise delivery of gene-editing components into mutated cells. To accomplish this, various delivery vectors have been designed and evaluated in mice, non-human primates (NHPs), and human clinical trials6,7,11,12. These vectors generally fall into two categories: viral and non-viral. Viral vectors, especially adeno-associated vectors (AAVs), have been widely utilized to deliver genome-editing components. Clinical trials have shown initial success in treating mucopolysaccharidosis (MPS) Type I (MPS I)13,14, mucopolysaccharidosis Type II (MPS II)15, and Leber congenital amaurosis type 10 (LCA10)16. Despite these advances, viral vectors bear inherent drawbacks, including immunogenicity, limited packaging capacity, and the risk of detrimental transgene insertion17. For example, Jesse Gelsinger’s death from systemic inflammatory response syndrome in 1999 led to the withdrawal of adenoviral vectors from frontline use18. And in 2002, a patient with X-linked severe combined immunodeficiency developed leukemia following retroviral gene therapy, demonstrating the risk of insertional oncogenesis19. In contrast, non-viral vectors offer advantages such as the ability to load different formats of gene-editing components, improved immune biocompatibility, and greater packing capacity17,20,21. These merits indicate the potential of non-viral delivery vectors for therapeutic genome editing.

In this review, we first provide an overview of genome-editing tools that have been used in treating genetic diseases and their delivery formats, including plasmid DNA (pDNA), messenger RNA (mRNA), and ribonucleoprotein (RNP) complexes (Fig. 1). We then introduce several CRISPR-based gene-editing tools, including CRISPR-Cas9, CRISPR-Cas12a, BEs, PEs, and RNA editing tools. Then, we elucidate the pathophysiology of various genetic disorders and describe both preclinical and clinical genome-editing approaches. Given the crucial role of delivery in effective gene therapy, we highlight recent advances in non-viral delivery vectors, including gold nanoparticles (GNPs), polymeric vectors, lipid-based vectors, and virus-like particles (VLPs), for in vivo therapies. Finally, we summarize the progress of non-viral vectors and discuss challenges faced when translating these gene-editing therapies from bench to bedside.Figure 1 Delivery of therapeutic gene editing machinery using non-viral vectors for treating genetic diseases. Five representative carriers—lipid nanoparticles, liposomes, polymeric vectors, gold nanoparticles, and extracellular vesicles—deliver three cargo formats (plasmid DNA encoding Cas9 and sgRNA; Cas9 mRNA + sgRNA; or a Cas9–sgRNA ribonucleoprotein complex) into the cytoplasm, from which the cargos translocate to the nucleus. There, genome editors—including CRISPR-Cas9, Cas12a, adenine and cytosine base editors, and prime editors—execute sequence-specific corrections.

Figure 1

2 Genome editors

Genome editing has significantly expanded its toolbox in recent years. Notable examples, such as ZFNs, TALENs, CRISPR-Cas9, CRISPR-Cas12a, BEs, PEs, and RNA editing tools, have all been employed to treat genetic diseases (Fig. 1). These editors can be delivered in various cargo formats. For example, the CRISPR-Cas9 system, comprising the Cas9 protein and single guide RNA (sgRNA), can be delivered in three formats: (1) as DNA encoding Cas9 protein and guide RNA (gRNA), (2) as mRNA that facilitates Cas9 translation—often co-delivered with sgRNA, and (3) as RNP complexes combining Cas9 protein with sgRNA17. Each delivery strategy features distinct characteristics, with unique advantages and challenges22.

2.1 Introduction of genome editors

2.1.1 ZFNs and TALENs

ZFNs facilitate gene editing by fusing a recognition domain of zinc finger protein (ZFP) with the cleavage domain of the FokI restriction enzyme23. ZFPs consist of multiple zinc finger domains, each stabilized by binding a zinc ion through conserved cysteine and histidine residues and recognizing about three base pairs of DNA24. Conversely, the FokI domain cleaves DNA nonspecifically and requires dimerization for its activity25. By modifying both the zinc fingers and the FokI dimerization, ZFNs have been optimized to enhance gene editing specificity while reducing toxicity levels26. Similarly, TALENs combine a DNA-binding domain derived from transcription activator-like effector (TALE) with the FokI catalytic domain27. TALENs achieve DNA specificity through a series of 33–35 amino acid repeats, each containing a pair of hypervariable residues that recognize a single base pair28,29. This one-to-one recognition mechanism simplifies the modular design of TALENs compared to ZFNs30.

2.1.2 CRISPR-Cas9

CRISPR-Cas is a family of programmable nucleases initially discovered for their ability to induce site-specific double-strand DNA breaks (DSBs), which has greatly advanced genome-editing technologies. The widely used archetypal Cas9 protein from Streptococcus pyogenes (spCas9), part of the type II CRISPR-Cas system, is preferred for its high specificity and efficacy31. The CRISPR-Cas9 system comprises three essential components: the Cas9 enzyme, responsible for DNA catalytic activity; CRISPR RNA (crRNA), serving as the guiding sequence; and trans-activating crRNA (tracrRNA), complementing crRNA and facilitating its maturation31,32. A simplified approach utilizes a single guide RNA (sgRNA) that is formed by fusing crRNA and tracrRNA to direct CRISPR-Cas9 to its target sites31,33. Target binding requires recognition of a short protospacer adjacent motif (PAM) downstream of the target site. Upon PAM recognition, the Cas9 protein unwinds the adjacent DNA and checks for complementarity with the sgRNA. If the match is sufficient, Cas9 undergoes conformational changes that activate its nuclease domains34. Cas9 then cleaves the double-stranded DNA (dsDNA) at specific locations to generate DSBs. These breaks are repaired through two distinct pathways: error-prone nonhomologous end joining (NHEJ), which typically results in small insertions or deletions (indels) that disrupt the gene, and homology-directed repair (HDR), which allows gene repair or insertion via template-guided mechanisms35.

2.1.3 CRIPSR-Cas12a

Cas12a, also known as Cpf1, is a protein identified in Class 2, type V CRISPR-Cas systems36. In contrast to the CRISPR-Cas9 system, Cas12a processes its guides by recognizing a conserved pseudoknot structure within the repeat-derived segment of the crRNA37. Moreover, Cas12a recognizes a T-rich PAM, which distinguishes it from the G-rich PAM recognized by the CRISPR-Cas9 system36. Cas12a cleaves both DNA strands at sites to the PAM, generating DSBs with staggered ends. Additionally, after cleaving the target DNA, Cas12a remains catalytically active and can nonspecifically cleave additional single-stranded DNA (ssDNA), a property that has been harnessed for molecular diagnostic tools38.

2.1.4 BEs

BEs are innovative genome-editing tools that enable precise, single-nucleotide modifications in DNA or RNA without inducing DSBs39. These tools function by combining a catalytically impaired Cas protein with a deaminase enzyme, which facilitates the conversion of one base to another at a specific genomic site39. There are two primary types of DNA BEs: cytosine base editors (CBEs) and adenine base editors (ABEs). CBEs convert C•G base pairs into T•A base pairs, while ABEs change A•T base pairs into G•C base pairs39. CBEs are engineered by fusing cytidine deaminases and uracil glycosylase inhibitor (UGI) domains with Cas9 nickase (nCas9)40. nCas9 specifically cleaves a single DNA strand to create a single-stranded stretch of genomic DNA (the R-loop). Then, cytidine deaminases facilitate the conversion of cytosines to uracils within the R-loop, which is read as a thymine during DNA replication, DNA repair, and transcription. Additionally, UGIs prevent the formation of abasic sites by inhibiting the activity of uracil glycosylases. Because natural deaminases that act on deoxyadenosine are not known, ABEs utilize laboratory-evolved TadA∗ deoxyadenosine deaminases to convert adenosines into inosines, which are then read as guanines during transcription4142.

BEs are valuable for genome editing due to: (i) their high efficiency in non-dividing cells; (ii) the ability to bypass HDR machinery; (iii) the provision of precise editing outcomes with minimal byproducts (a >10:1 ratio of desired edits to indels); and (iv) their capability to function solely with mRNA or RNP agents, eliminating the need for DNA templates. Nevertheless, BEs are limited by the need for precise targeting within the optimal editing window, typically nucleotides 4–7 of the protospacer, to avoid unintended edits. Meanwhile, proper alignment with the PAM sequence is crucial for Cas9 binding; if the protospacer is misaligned, efficient editing may be hindered. Meanwhile, off-target editing remains a concern for BEs. To address these limitations, advanced versions, such as BE3, BE4, BE4-Gam, ABE7.10, and ABE8e40,43, 44, 45, have been developed to enhance editing efficiency and reduce indel occurrences. Furthermore, Walton et al.46 have developed SpG and SpRY variants of the spCas9 enzyme that can recognize a wider range of PAMs, overcoming the limitation faced by BEs in targeting only specific sequences within a genome.

To conclude, both ABEs47, 48, 49 and CBEs50 have demonstrated promising results in preclinical studies targeting genetic diseases. Considering that single-nucleotide polymorphisms cause many genetic diseases, base editing holds great promise for correcting such pathogenic mutations51,52.

2.1.5 PEs

Conventional BEs are typically limited to correcting only four transition mutations (C→T, G→A, A→G, and T→C), In contrast, the prime editor developed by David Liu’s group53 can correct all 12 possible point mutations, as well as perform insertions up to 44 bp and deletions up to 80 bp, without inducing DSBs or necessitating donor DNA. The prime editing system comprises a fusion protein consisting of nCas9 (H840A) and reverse transcriptase (RT), along with a specifically designed guide RNA known as a prime editing guide RNA (pegRNA). Unlike standard sgRNA, pegRNA i contains an extra 3′ sequence that acts as a reverse RNA template and a primer binding site capable of hybridizing with the 3′ end of the nicked DNA strand. Upon target binding, the prime editor (PE2) creates a nick in the non-PAM-containing DNA strand at the R-loop. Reverse transcriptase then extends the 3′ end of the nicked strand using the pegRNA as a template, incorporating the desired edit into the newly synthesized DNA strand. The cellular DNA repair then processes the edited DNA flap, leading to its permanent integration into the genome.

PEs are valuable for genome editing due to their (i) high versatility compared to BEs while avoiding DSBs, (ii) cleaner editing outcomes with fewer indels than nuclease-mediated HDR, and (iii) exceptional precision with minimal off-target effects. This precision likely results from two extra DNA hybridization steps (reverse-transcriptase priming and DNA flap resolution) that help reject off-target sequences. However, while offering versatility, the editing efficiencies of PEs are limited, typically ranging from 5% to 20%, depending on the specific conditions. Moreover, the design of pegRNAs remains challenging. PEs require careful consideration of the editing window, template sequences, and the 3′ extension.

To enhance editing efficiency, PE3 introduces an additional nick on the opposite (non-edited) strand, which stimulates cellular repair mechanisms that favor the incorporation of the edited sequence42,53. Furthermore, PE4 and PE5, derived from PE2 and PE3, respectively, further improve editing efficiency by transiently co-expressing an engineered DNA mismatch repair (MMR)-inhibiting protein (MLH1dn)54. Additionally, PE6, developed through phage-assisted continuous evolution (PACE) and protein engineering, enhances the RT domain and Cas9 variants within the prime editing system, thereby improving its editing capabilities55. Recently, a novel system, PE7, has utilized the La RNA-binding N-terminal domain for specific recognition and interaction with the 3′ ends of polyuridylated pegRNAs, further improving the precision and efficiency of PEs56. As a versatile and precise tool, prime editing has significant potential in the treatment of genetic diseases.

2.1.6 RNA editing

In addition to the DNA-editing tools mentioned above, some systems have also been developed for RNA editing57. For example, Cas13 utilizes crRNA for RNA recognition, with enzymatic versatility that includes precursor crRNA processing, sequence-specific RNA cleavage, and collateral RNA degradation, making it a promising candidate for RNA-based intervention58. For instance, Cas13a enables transient suppression of endogenous gene expression in human cell lines with high specificity and minimal off-target activity59. Recent advancements include engineered variants such as RfxCas13d and the compact Cas13X, which mitigate collateral RNA cleavage while retaining targeting precision60,61. Furthermore, catalytically inactive dCas13 fused with RNA-modifying deaminases has facilitated the development of RNA BEs, enabling precise correction of single-nucleotide mutations without permanent genomic alteration62,63. In the meantime, critical challenges, including bystander RNA effects, potential DNA off-target activity (despite RNA specificity), and immunogenicity, necessitate rigorous safety evaluations in preclinical models.

2.1.7 Comparison of different genome editors

In summary, different genome editors have distinct features and applications. ZFNs and TALENs can recognize and bind to different DNA sequences, but the construction process is complex and costly. In contrast, CRISPR-Cas9 offers greater simplicity, efficiency, and versatility, making it the most widely adopted genome-editing tool for treating genetic diseases. However, compared to ZFNs and TALENs, which can target any target site, the CRISPR-Cas system is often limited by the PAM sequence. Additionally, CRISPR-Cas still carries the risk of off-target effects. In contrast, BEs and PEs directly convert single bases without inducing DSBs, thereby reducing potential safety concerns. Compared to BEs, PEs offer higher versatility, correcting a broader range of point mutations, offering higher accuracy, and lower off-target rates. However, BEs and PEs, due to their larger size and more complex components, pose new challenges for delivery. Compared to the aforementioned DNA-editing tools, RNA editing tools such as CRISPR-Cas13 can correct mutations at the transcriptional level, making them relatively safer. Nevertheless, because RNA molecules have a transient lifespan, continuous delivery of these editing tools may be required to achieve long-term therapeutic effects. Moreover, as the therapeutic potential of CRISPR technologies continues to grow, other important considerations, such as affordability, regulation, and access, must also be addressed. For a more comprehensive exploration of the ethical and societal challenges associated with these technologies, we direct readers to the relevant references64,65.

2.2 Delivery forms of gene editing cargoes

2.2.1 Plasmid DNA

The first delivery format is plasmid DNA (pDNA), which encodes Cas9 and sgRNA, requiring nuclear entry in the host for transcription and translation into the Cas9 protein. Consequently, DNA exhibits slower expression kinetics compared to RNA and RNP complexes. Despite this, pDNA remains popular due to its straightforward production and stable expression characteristics66. An advantage of pDNA lies in its facile and convenient bacterial amplification, allowing for easy production. Moreover, DNA offers greater stability with the potential for either integration into the host chromosome or retention as episomal DNA within the nucleus. This long-term overexpression is preferred for some treatments, such as gene replacement therapies targeting recessive monogenic diseases67, 68, 69. However, utilizing DNA-based delivery formats may result in unintended genomic integration and potentially induce insertional mutagenesis22,70, and pDNA derived from bacteria might trigger immune responses via Toll-like receptors71. These limitations raise safety concerns when considering the transition of pDNA-based genome-editing tools from bench to bedside.

2.2.2 RNA

For the RNA-based strategy, the co-delivery of two individual components—Cas9 mRNA and sgRNA—is used in the CRISPR-Cas system. RNA delivery offers distinct advantages over DNA-based delivery methods by addressing several inherent limitations. Specifically, Cas9 delivered as mRNA only requires cytoplasmic entry for translation, which provides two significant benefits: it circumvents obstacles related to nuclear localization of nucleic acids and reduces the risk of chromosomal integration associated with pDNA delivery. Furthermore, the naturally short half-life of mRNA facilitates rapid and transient Cas9 expression, minimizing off-target effects72. However, delivering mRNA and gRNA systems introduces new challenges. For example, in vivo kinetics differ between mRNA and sgRNA, necessitating an optimal co-delivery strategy that involves separate, staged delivery. Both components ultimately enter the same cell to form RNPs and achieve their intended function, which presents a paradoxical situation73. Moreover, suitable protection during in vivo delivery is essential due to the inherent instability and susceptibility to degradation exhibited by mRNA72.

Optimizing the structural design of mRNA systematically can boost protein expression, thereby increasing its efficacy in the treatment of genetic disorders74,75. For instance, the 5′ untranslated region (5′-UTR) and 3′ untranslated region (3′-UTR) exert influence on mRNA translation efficiency by modulating both mRNA stability and the translation process76. Additionally, the incorporation of alternative nucleotides, such as pseudouridine, N6-methyladenosine, and 5-methylcytidine, into mRNA can reduce immunogenicity and enhance translation efficiency77. Hence, mRNA delivery remains a promising field within gene-editing therapies.

2.2.3 RNP

Cas9/gRNA RNPs are formed by combining the Cas9 protein with gRNA prior to introducing the complex into a cell. Upon binding to gRNA, the α-helix recognition lobe of the Cas9 protein undergoes a conformational change, thereby activating the protein for DNA recognition and cleavage78. As pre-assembled and functional RNP complexes, they enable the fastest kinetic form of genome editing79. The utilization of Cas9 RNPs offers several advantages over pDNA and RNA delivery approaches. RNPs can achieve higher gene editing efficiency with lower toxicity, resulting in reported on-target mutation rates ranging from 76% to 79%70. Furthermore, RNPs exhibit rapid degradation kinetics; in vitro studies have shown complete degradation of Cas9 proteins within 4 h, significantly reducing the risk of off-target effects70,80. Moreover, RNPs exhibit relatively low immunogenicity and may provide improved safety profiles for in vivo applications81. Despite the evident potential, the delivery of RNPs presents significant challenges for non-viral carriers due to the considerable size and complex charged residues of Cas9, as well as the strong negative charge of sgRNAs. Additionally, there is a need to protect RNPs from degradation or denaturation throughout the formulation and delivery process82. Nevertheless, continuous advancements in protein delivery research make it possible to overcome these challenges in the future.

2.2.4 Comparison of pDNA, RNA, and RNP in non-viral delivery systems

In non-viral delivery systems, each format—pDNA, RNA, and RNP—has its unique advantages and limitations. pDNA remains popular for long-term gene expression due to its stability, ease of production, and potential for sustained overexpression. However, it carries the risk of genomic integration, potential immune activation, and slower expression kinetics. RNA and RNP complexes, on the other hand, offer a faster and safer alternative by bypassing genomic integration and reducing immune response. Their transient nature and instability, however, limit their application in therapies requiring long-term expression. Meanwhile, RNP complexes still face challenges in delivery efficiency and complex manufacturing processes, which can hinder their use in certain applications.

Notably, none of these forms can naturally pass through cell membranes, making the development of delivery strategies a critical challenge. While nucleic acids (pDNA and RNA) share similar chemical and physicochemical properties, proteins are highly diverse biomolecules with varying structural conformations, charges, and hydrophilicity/hydrophobicity. Therefore, the choice of delivery format must be carefully considered, taking into account the specific therapeutic goals, the required duration of expression, and safety considerations for each application.

3 Genome editing gene therapy for genetic diseases

Genome editors, particularly CRISPR-based technologies, have shown tremendous promise in preclinical and clinical studies for correcting genetic mutations. Specifically, for genetic diseases affecting tissues such as the liver, lungs, muscle, eyes, and ears, genome editing presents a direct method for repairing gene defects at the DNA level. In this section, we first elucidate the pathophysiology of genetic disorders affecting various organs. As summarized in Table 1, we provide an overview of the mutated genes, pathogenic causes, and affected organs associated with different genetic diseases. We then discuss current research on gene editing therapies for these genetic disorders. Specifically, as shown in Table 2, we summarize key clinical trials that have been conducted for these therapies.

3.1 Genetic diseases associated with liver dysfunction

The liver plays a critical role in various metabolic pathways, making it the source of many inherited metabolic liver diseases. A common characteristic among these disorders is a deficiency in the synthesis or functionality of proteins crucial to metabolic biochemical pathways83. Furthermore, the liver functions as a protein manufacturing facility, releasing a majority of the abundant proteins present in the bloodstream. This attribute positions the liver as a promising bioreactor for producing recombinant proteins and treating some genetic disorders, such as Familial hypercholesterolemia (FH) and hereditary angioedema (HAE)76. Conventional enzyme replacement therapy is available for only a few liver-related genetic diseases. Moreover, organ donor shortages restrict orthotopic liver transplantation, which necessitates lifelong immunosuppression. Consequently, strategies involving gene editing targeted at the liver have emerged as promising alternatives for treating genetic diseases associated with hepatic dysfunction.

3.1.1 Tyrosinemia and genome editing strategies

HT1 is a rare autosomal recessive disease with a global incidence of approximately 1 in 100,000 to 120,000 newborns84. HT1 is characterized by a deficiency of fumarylacetoacetate hydrolase (FAH), the final enzyme in the tyrosine catabolic pathway. Disruption of this metabolic pathway leads to the accumulation of maleylacetoacetic acid and fumarylacetoacetic acid, resulting in significant hepatocyte injury due to their hepatotoxic nature84. P-hydroxyphenylpyruvate dioxygenase (HPD) is another enzyme involved in the tyrosine degradation pathway. Although mutations in the HPD gene are not directly responsible for HT1, they play a crucial role upstream of the FAH-catalyzed step. Inhibition of HPD reduces production of toxic metabolites downstream, thereby alleviating symptoms and disease progression84. Experimental treatments for HT1 have utilized ex vivo and in vivo gene editing techniques. In ex vivo treatments, hepatocytes are harvested from the donor, genetically modified with the CRISPR-Cas system to correct point mutations within the Fah gene, and then transplanted back into the animal model85. Furthermore, HT1 has been successfully cured in Fah−/− mouse models through in vivo gene editing experiments utilizing BE or CRISPR-Cas9 systems47,86, 87, 88.

3.1.2 FH

FH is a hereditary disorder characterized by abnormally high levels of low-density lipoprotein-cholesterol (LDL-C) in the blood. It occurs in two forms, heterozygous and homozygous89. In most cases, FH results from loss-of-function variations in the LDL receptor (LDLR) gene, including splicing mutations, large-scale DNA copy number variations, insertions and deletions, as well as missense and nonsense variants89. Mutations in ApoB also contribute to FH since ApoB serves as an LDLR ligand located on the surface of LDL particles. Approximately 2%–5% of individuals exhibiting the FH phenotype have loss-of-function variants in ApoB90. Additionally, Gain-of-function variants in the PCSK9 gene, which inhibit LDLR, contribute to 1%–2% of FH cases91. Preclinical studies have investigated gene editing therapies for FH by targeting the above three genetic factors. Zhao et al.92 utilized AAV-CRISPR-Cas9 to correct the point mutation in LdlrE208X mice. Vanhoye et al.93 employed CRISPR-Cas9 to create APOB knockout (KO) and APOB-p.Leu351Arg knock-in (KI) Huh7 cells, reducing APOB expression. CRISPR-Cas9 and ABE systems have also been used to downregulate PCSK9 levels, showing promising results in FH treatment48,94, 95, 96.

3.1.3 Transthyretin amyloidosis

Transthyretin amyloidosis (ATTR amyloidosis) is a severe disorder primarily characterized by neuropathy and/or cardiomyopathy97, 98, 99, occurring in both hereditary and wild-type forms100. The Transthyretin (TTR) is a 55 kDa tetrameric protein that plays a crucial role in the transportation of thyroxine and retinol-binding protein. Consequently, it contributes to nerve regeneration, behavior, cognition, and other essential functions98,101. The TTR gene is located on chromosome 18q12.1. More than 100 different mutations in the TTR gene have been identified as causative factors for hereditary ATTR amyloidosis100. Single-point mutations can induce misfolding and aggregation of TTR in the heart, nerves, and other tissues, leading to disease manifestation98. Considering the demonstrated benefits of TTR knockdown through siRNA-based and ASO-based clinical studies for patients with ATTR amyloidosis, CRISPR-Cas-mediated gene editing holds promise for its treatment. Furthermore, CRISPR-Cas technology enables precise targeting and editing of hepatocytes responsible for nearly all plasma TTR production while mitigating off-target effects. Currently underway is a Phase III trial (NCT06128629) investigating NTLA-2001 (Intellia Therapeutics), a CRISPR-based gene editing candidate that targets the TTR gene specifically for treating ATTR amyloidosis.

3.1.4 HAE

HAE is a rare autosomal dominant disorder characterized by sporadic and recurrent episodes of non-urticarial swelling in the skin, gastrointestinal tract, upper airway, face, and throat102. These symptoms can significantly impair daily activities, work responsibilities, and recreational pursuits. Furthermore, laryngeal swelling poses a life-threatening risk103. The majority of HAE cases are associated with insufficient activity of C1 inhibitor (C1INH). The SERPING1 gene encodes the C1INH protein, which is primarily synthesized in the liver and released into the bloodstream. C1INH serves as a key regulator for several proteases involved in the complement system, contact system, coagulation, and fibrinolysis pathways. Inadequate regulatory function of C1INH within the contact system leads to uncontrolled activation of factor XII (factor XIIa) and plasma kallikrein, resulting in excessive production of bradykinin—a vasoactive peptide102,104. NTLA-2002 (Intellia Therapeutics), an experimental CRISPR-Cas9-based therapy targeting liver cells, aims to disrupt the prekallikrein (KLKB1) gene responsible for its production. Currently undergoing a phase 1/2 clinical trial among adults diagnosed with type I or II HAE (NCT05120830), we will discuss this treatment later.

3.1.5 PKU

PKU is a hepatic disorder characterized by a deficiency of the enzyme phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH), leading to the accumulation of phenylalanine (L-Phe) in the bloodstream. This disease follows an autosomal recessive inheritance pattern, requiring mutations in both PAH alleles for its manifestation105. The elevated L-Phe level in the brain negatively affects neuropsychological function105. Current therapeutic approaches for PKU can be broadly categorized into two main strategies: (1) dietary restriction of phenylalanine intake and (2) pharmacological interventions like sapropterin or pegvaliase to control the disease106. However, both therapies face challenges in achieving optimal therapeutic outcomes, highlighting the need for a lifelong treatment solution for PKU. Gene editing therapy for PKU aims to correct the PAH gene or integrate a PAH expression cassette into the genome to restore normal enzyme function and metabolic balance. Although CRISPR-Cas9 has been used to co-deliver a DNA repair template with AAV vectors in mouse models, it failed to fully correct Phe levels107,108. However, studies using BEs or PEs showed better outcomes. For example, one study achieved a 41% PAH gene correction with an rAAV vector109. These new gene editing technologies may pave the way for the clinical treatment of PKU.

3.2 Genetic diseases associated with lung dysfunction

Lung genetic disorders primarily include various respiratory syndromes characterized by airway obstruction. Among these lung genetic disorders, CF, resulting from single-gene mutations, emerges as the most prevalent and severe disease110,111. In addition to CF, surfactant protein B (SP-B) deficiency also represents an autosomal recessive disorder112. These life-threatening diseases still lack effective treatment options. Recently, the use of CRISPR-Cas9 for precise gene editing has opened up new possibilities for treating lung genetic disorders113.

3.2.1 SP-B deficiency and genome therapy strategies

SP-B deficiency is an autosomal recessive disorder, occurring in ∼1/1,000,000 births. Newborns with SP-B deficiency experience rapid respiratory deterioration, leading to mortality within 3 to 6 months without lung transplantation. The majority of affected infants inherit biallelic null variants of the SFTPB gene in a recessive manner, resulting in the complete or near-complete loss of mature SP-B expression114. In rare cases, extended survival beyond the first months or years has been associated with hypomorphic missense variants that allow partial expression and function of SP-B115. These findings underscore the urgent need to develop alternative therapeutic strategies for treating SP-B deficiency. Potential therapies, including SFTPB mRNA therapy116 and SFTPB cDNA transfection117,118, have demonstrated efficacy in extending the survival of SP-B deficient mice.

Additionally, gene editing techniques have been utilized to treat SP-B deficiency in mouse models. For example, Mahiny et al.119 effectively corrected SP-B deficiency by facilitating HDR and enabling sustained expression of SP-B using nuclease-encoding mRNA in a transgenic mouse model. However, gene therapies for treating SP-B deficiency remain in the preclinical stage and require further development.

3.2.2 CF and gene editing strategies

CF is an inherited disorder caused by mutations in the CFTR gene, which encodes the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) protein, essential for chloride and bicarbonate ion transport across epithelial cell membranes110,111. CF patients primarily suffer from recurrent lung infections and inflammations, which can lead to airway blockages and severe respiratory issues110. Due to its genetic complexity, over 2000 CFTR variants have been identified, with approximately 700 confirmed as disease-causing120. The F508del mutation, present on at least one allele in around 85% of CF patients, disrupts protein folding and membrane expression, significantly reducing the functional activity of CFTR channels. Other common mutations, including W1282X, R334W, and A455E, are also associated with multiple defects121. Gene editing advancements have shown promise in treating CF113. ABEs and PEs have repaired various nonsense mutations, including F508del, using epithelial cells or patient-derived intestinal organoids, restoring CFTR functionality122, 123, 124. A recent study by Sun et al.125 demonstrated the potential of LNPs to correct the R553X mutation in CF mouse lung stem cells, indicating the potential of in vivo targeted gene editing to cure CF.

3.3 Other genetic diseases

3.3.1 Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) and genome editing strategies

DMD is a debilitating X-linked recessive disorder caused by a genetic deficiency of dystrophin, a protein encoded by the DMD gene. Dystrophin primarily protects muscles from contractile damage and participates in the MARK2 kinase signaling process through its interactions with the dystrophin-associated protein complex (DAPC). This interaction regulates muscle satellite (stem) cell polarity and asymmetric division126,127. The absence of dystrophin disrupts the DAPC, leading to the mislocalization and reduced expression of its components from the sarcolemma128. Located within one of the largest known human genes spanning approximately 2.2 Mb and containing 79 exons, the DMD gene exhibits a high frequency of de novo mutations. Predominant mutations causing DMD include whole exon deletions (68%), exon duplications (11%), and nonsense mutations (10%)129.

The CRISPR-Cas system has facilitated promising therapeutic strategies for the genetic correction of DMD, focusing on exon excision, exon reframing, exon skipping, and precise point mutation correction130, 131, 132. The first CRISPR clinical trial for DMD, CRD-TMH-001 (NCT05514249), aimed to activate dystrophin expression via CRISPR activation (CRISPRa). CRISPRa utilizes catalytically inactive Cas9 (dCas9) fused with an effector domain, such as VP64, to enhance transcriptional activation without generating DSBs133. However, the trial was halted after the sole participant experienced fatal complications, possibly due to delivery efficiency, immune responses against AAV vectors, or off-target effects.

3.3.2 Mucopolysaccharidoses and genome editing strategies

Mucopolysaccharidoses are inherited metabolic disorders caused by deficiencies in lysosomal enzymes essential for glycosaminoglycan (GAG) degradation. These disorders are classified into eleven types based on specific enzyme deficiencies outlined in an earlier review134. MPS I accounts for approximately 15% of mucopolysaccharidoses cases and results from a deficiency in alpha-(IDUA), which is responsible for the breakdown of GAGs such as heparan sulfate (HS) and dermatan sulfate (DS)135,136. GAG accumulation in lysosomes disrupts cellular function and tissue integrity, leading to diverse clinical manifestations136. The IDUA gene mutations in MPS I exhibit variable locations, with the three predominant variants identified as p.Trp402Ter, p.Gln70Ter, and p.Pro533Arg134. MPS II (Hunter Syndrome) is caused by a deficiency in the enzyme iduronate-2-sulfatase (IDS), which is also responsible for degrading GAGs in lysosomes. The main clinical symptoms of MPS II closely resemble those of MPS I137. MPS II is the only X-linked form of MPS (Xq28), with 658 variants identified in the IDS gene as of 2020. The most common variants include p.Arg468Gln, p.Arg468Trp, and p.Ser333Leu134.

Gene editing approaches utilizing ZFNs for the treatment of mucopolysaccharidoses are currently undergoing clinical trials134. The CHAMPIONS phase 1/2 clinical trial (NCT03041324) explored the ZFN-mediated introduction of a functional IDS transgene into the albumin locus via AAV2/6 in MPS II138. Despite the approach, post-treatment plasma IDS levels in participants remained relatively low. The “EMPOWERS” trial (NCT02702115) for MPS I employs a similar strategy, substituting IDUA for IDS, but plasma IDUA levels in participants showed no significant improvement139. These findings suggest that in vivo gene editing for mucopolysaccharidoses requires further optimization.

3.3.3 Retinal and vitreoretinal diseases and genome editing strategies

Monogenic retinal and vitreoretinal diseases, such as LCA, night blindness, retinitis pigmentosa, and achromatopsia140, are ideal for CRISPR applications in the eye. The small size of the eye reduces the need for extensive vector production, while its enclosed structure limits the spread of vectors, thereby enhancing safety. The immune-privileged nature of the eye may support prolonged expression of prokaryotic Cas proteins141. Gene editing strategies for inherited eye disorders typically involve gene replacement or augmentation to address recessive or loss-of-function mutations, while gene inactivation or repression is employed for dominant or gain-of-function mutations142. Preclinical therapeutic strategies utilizing CRISPR-Cas systems have been applied to treat various eye diseases. A detailed discussion of these studies is beyond the scope of this review, but can be found in other comprehensive reviews143.

LCA, a genetic retinal disorder that typically presents in early childhood, can lead to blindness. EDIT-101 (Editas Medicine), a gene editing candidate for LCA, utilized an AAV5 vector containing expression cassettes for Cas9 and a pair of sgRNAs designed to correct aberrant splice donor sites and restore normal CEP290 expression16. Phase 1/2 clinical trial (NCT03872479) results indicated that EDIT-101 was well-tolerated, with no significant adverse events, and 8/14 participants reported symptom improvement144.

3.3.4 Hearing loss (HL) and genome editing strategies

HL is the predominant sensory disorder affecting humans, with a global prevalence of over 5%, equivalent to 466 million individuals. It is projected that by 2050, this number will exceed 900 million, affecting ∼10% of the population145. HL can be congenital or acquired and may result from genetic or environmental factors, or a combination of both. For example, congenital HL affects approximately 1 in 500 newborns, with more than half of these cases attributed to genetic factors (genetic HL), while the remaining cases are caused by environmental factors (non-genetic/acquired HL)146. In recent years, the CRISPR-Cas system has gained significant attention as a promising approach for both modeling and treating genetic HL. Different forms of CRISPR-Cas cargos (DNA, mRNA, and protein) have been introduced into inner ear cells using viral147,148 and non-viral149,150 delivery methods. Furthermore, considering that more than 80% of deafness-associated variants are single-nucleotide variants (SNVs), BEs hold great potential as tools for the treatment of genetic HL145. For example, Xue et al.151 utilized an enhanced mini-dCas13X RNA base editor (emxABE) to edit the OTOF gene at the RNA level by converting the TAG stop codon to TGG. This intervention successfully restored otoferlin expression and auditory function in a mouse model of genetic HL.

3.3.5 Fragile X syndrome (FXS) dystrophy and genome editing strategies

FXS is classified as an intellectual disability and autism spectrum disorder, with a prevalence of approximately 2.1% among individuals with autism spectrum disorders (ASDs)152,153. The condition is characterized by an excessive expansion of CGG triplet repeats in the 5′ untranslated region of the X-linked fragile X mental retardation 1 gene (FMR1), leading to the loss of fragile X mental retardation protein (FMRP)154. FMRP is an RNA-binding protein that plays a crucial role in regulating the synthesis of numerous proteins essential for synaptic function, particularly group 1 metabotropic glutamate receptors (mGluRs) and GABA receptors155. Consequently, the loss of FMRP will subsequently impair brain development. Preclinical studies have utilized CRISPR-based gene editing systems to delete or modify CGG repeats of the FMR1 gene153,156,157. Park et al.156 utilized the CRISPR-Cas9 gene editing tool to induce DSBs upstream of the CGG repeat region, thereby reactivating silenced gene expression and promoting FMRP production.

3.3.6 Sickle cell disease (SCD) and genome editing strategies

SCD is the most prevalent monogenic hematologic disorder, characterized by congenital hemolytic anemia resulting from an inherited point mutation in the β-globin gene on chromosome 11158. This mutation results in the substitution of valine for glutamate at the sixth codon of the hemoglobin beta-chain (HBB), producing abnormal hemoglobin S (HbS). Under hypoxic or acidic conditions, HbS polymerizes, causing red blood cells (RBCs) to deform into a narrow sickle shape159,160. This change in RBC morphology reduces their flexibility and lifespan, leading to recurrent vascular occlusion, acute and chronic pain, chronic hemolytic anemia, increased susceptibility to infections, and multi-organ failure161. Treatment options for this condition have remained limited. Medications for SCD only manage and alleviate symptoms but do not provide a cure. CRISPR-Cas9 gene editing offers a promising alternative. Initially applied in vitro to correct mutated genes in primary bone marrow-derived CD34+ cells from SCD patients, this technology has already been implemented in a clinical trial (NCT05456880)162. Recent studies have utilized animal models to assess the correction rates of various methods in vivo162.

4 Non-viral gene editing delivery for treating genetic diseases

Non-viral gene therapy approaches offer promising solutions to the challenges posed by viral vectors. These synthetic vectors are typically less immunogenic, can accommodate larger genetic payloads, and are easier to manufacture. Consequently, there is significant interest in developing effective and safe non-viral methods for delivering genome editing enzymes to treat genetic diseases. In the field of genetic disease therapy, numerous non-viral systems, including inorganic vectors, polymeric vectors, lipid-based vectors, and biomimetic vectors, have undergone extensive investigation in both preclinical and clinical settings (Table 347, 48, 49,82,88,94,100,119,125,135,153,163, 164, 165, 166, 167, 168, 169, 170, 171, 172, 173, 174, 175, 176, 177, 178, 179). Notably, with improvements in LNP delivery systems, several ongoing non-viral clinical trials targeting genetic diseases are being conducted (Fig. 2). The following sections will provide a comprehensive overview of how these four types of vectors facilitate the delivery of gene editing tools for treating genetic disorders.Table 3 Non-viral delivery strategies for delivering gene editing machinery to treat genetic diseases.

Table 3Delivery vector	Genetic disease	Gene editing format	Administration route	Ref.	
Chitosan and AAV	SP-B deficiency	ZFN mRNA and DNA donor	Intratracheal injection	119	
Polymeric nanocapsules	Eye diseases	spCas9 RNP	Subretinal injection	163	
Gold nanoparticles	DMD	Cas9 RNP and donor DNA	Intramuscular injection	164	
FXS	Cas9 RNP; Cas12a RNP	Stereotaxic injection to brain	153	
Cationic liposomes	HL	TALENs; Cas9 RNP	Inner ear injection	165	
spCas9 RNP	Inner ear injection	166	
MPS I	CRISPR-Cas9 pDNA and DNA donor oligo/plasmid	Intravenous injection	135	
Lipid nanoparticles and AAV	HT1	spCas9 mRNA, sgRNA and donor DNA	Intravenous injection	88	
Lipid nanoparticles	HT1	ABE mRNA and sgRNA	Intravenous injection	47	
FH	spCas9 mRNA and two sgRNAs;	Intravenous injection	94	
ABE mRNA and sgRNA	Intravenous injection	48,167	
ABE mRNA and gRNA	Retro-orbital injection	168	
ATTR amyloidosis	Cas9 mRNA and sgRNA	Intravenous injection	100,169,170	
DMD	Cas9 RNP	Intravenous injection	82	
PKU	CBE mRNA and sgRNA	Intravenous injection	171	
ABE RNP	Retro-orbital injection	172	
HAE	Cas9 mRNA and sgRNA	Intravenous infusion	173	
CF	ABE8e mRNA and sgRNA	Intravenous infusion	125	
SCD	Cas9 mRNA and sgRNA, ABE8e mRNA and sgRNA	Intravenous infusion	174	
Eye diseases	ABE RNP and PE RNP	Subretinal injection	175	
Virus-like particles	DMD	spCas9 RNP	Intramuscular injection	176	
Cas9 RNP; ABE RNP	Intramuscular injection	49	
AMD	Cas9 mRNA and sgRNA	Subretinal injection	177	
LCA 10	ABE RNP	Subretinal injection	178	
HT1	spCas9 RNP	Injection in embryos; retro-orbital injection	179	
Abbreviations: AAV, adeno-associated virus; ABE, adenine base editor; AMD, age-related macular degeneration; ATTR, transthyretin amyloidosis; CBE, cytosine base editor; Cas9, CRISPR-associated protein 9; Cas12a, CRISPR-associated protein 12a; CF, cystic fibrosis; DMD, Duchenne muscular dystrophy; FH, familial hypercholesterolaemia; FXS, fragile X syndrome; gRNA, guide RNA; HAE, hereditary angio-oedema; HL, hearing loss; HT1, hereditary tyrosinaemia type 1; LCA 10, Leber congenital amaurosis type 10; LNP, lipid nanoparticle; MPS I, mucopolysaccharidosis type I; pDNA, plasmid DNA; PE, prime editor; PKU, phenylketonuria; RNP, ribonucleoprotein; SCD, sickle cell disease; sgRNA, single-guide RNA; spCas9, Streptococcus pyogenes Cas9; TALENs, transcription activator-like effector nucleases; ZFN, zinc-finger nuclease.

Figure 2 A timeline of essential processes in treating genetic diseases with in vivo gene editing technologies. AAV vectors were used in early gene therapy trials, starting in 2016, for diseases such as MPS I, MPS II, and hemophilia B. They were later used in the 2018 subretinal injection for LCA10 patients (EDIT-101), and also for treating DMD in 2022. However, LNPs started appearing prominently in 2020 with the first human trial using CRISPR/Cas9-based in vivo therapy for treating ATTR. LNPs were then also used for treating HAE (NTLA-2002) in 2021 and are currently involved in Phase III trials for NTLA-2002 in 2023.

Figure 2

4.1 Inorganic vectors

Inorganic nanoparticles, such as GNPs, have been explored as a versatile platform for nucleic acid delivery and imaging in various applications. They can be precisely engineered to efficiently target and deliver therapeutic cargos180. Moreover, emerging research suggests that the immune responses triggered by nanoparticles can be either enhanced or inhibited, with their immune compatibility being significantly influenced by their surface chemistry181. Therefore, optimizing the composition, size, architecture, zeta potential, and surface coating of inorganic nanoparticles holds great promise for improving their compatibility.

GNPs are monodisperse nanostructures that can effectively deliver macromolecules such as proteins, pDNA, and siRNA through electrostatic interactions by functionalizing them with various ligands and chemical moieties (Fig. 3A)182,183. As versatile delivery platforms, GNPs offer several advantages: (i) GNPs can be easily fabricated in a scalable manner with minimal size variation, (ii) they can simultaneously carry multiple components by creating multilayers, with each monolayer capable of accommodating large quantities of cargo, and (iii) their biodistribution can be tailored by modifying their size and surface properties182,183.Figure 3 Inorganic and polymeric gene editing delivery systems. (A) The CRISPR-Gold system for delivering Cas9 RNP and donor DNA. DNA-SH was conjugated with 15-nm-diameter GNPs, which were then hybridized with single-stranded donor DNA. After loading the Cas9 and gRNA, the silicate and PAsp(DET) coatings were applied. (B) The chitosan-based delivery system utilizes chitosan-coated PLGA nanoparticles loaded with modified mRNA to deliver ZFN nucleases efficiently. (C) Biodegradable polymeric nanocapsules contain biodegradable disulfide crosslinkers sensitive to GSH, crosslinkers interacting with Cas9 RNP, and outer biodegradable liners. (D) The pH-sensitive mPEG-PC7A could form nanoparticles through self-assembly, packing donor DNA and Cas9 RNP to build HDR nanoparticles.

Figure 3

4.1.1 CRISPR-gold for the treatment of DMD and FXS dystrophy

Lee et al.164 developed “CRISPR-Gold”, using GNPs to co-deliver Cas9 RNP and donor DNA for the mutation correction in DMD mice. As shown in Fig. 3A, the CRISPR-Gold system encapsulates gene editing components by interaction between GNPs and thiol-terminated DNA to enable subsequent hybridization with donor DNA. Subsequently, Cas9 RNPs were non-covalently attached to the particles, and a negatively charged silica layer was deposited onto the nanoparticles to form complexes with the cationic polymer poly(aspartamide) bearing 1,2-diaminoethane (PAsp (DET)). PAsp (DET) exhibited distinct conformations under neutral and acidic conditions, allowing for endosomal disruption, and its weak proton sponge effect facilitated endosomal escape184. In primary myoblasts from DMD mice, CRISPR-Gold achieved a 3.3% HDR efficiency in correcting point mutations in the dystrophin gene and restored 0.3% of wild-type dystrophin expression. Intramuscular injection in DMD mice led to a 5.4% correction of the dystrophin gene, and robust dystrophin protein was observed in muscle tissues following in vivo treatment. This strategy highlights the potential of HDR in restoring dystrophin without the disruptions caused by NHEJ processes.

In 2017, Staahl et al.185 demonstrated non-viral delivery of Cas9 RNPs for in vivo gene editing in multiple brain regions by fusing NLS to the N- and C-termini of the Cas9 protein. Expanding on this, Lee et al.153 employed CRISPR-Gold for precise gene editing in the brain, specifically targeting the mGluR5 gene (Grm5) in the striatum of a mouse model with FXS. By stereotaxic injection of CRISPR-Gold loaded with Cas9 or Cas12a RNPs, they achieved a 40%–50% reduction in mGluR5 expression in Fmr1 KO mice, rescuing excessive digging and jumping behaviors. This study underscores the potential of CRISPR-Gold in treating brain disorders and paves the way for future advancements.

Compared to other inorganic vectors such as silica nanoparticles (SiNPs), GNPs exhibit unique advantages in delivering genome editors, including enhanced cellular internalization and versatile functionalization. However, their medical applications face significant challenges. First, unlike biodegradable SiNPs, which are metabolized into biocompatible byproducts, GNPs are non-biodegradable and may accumulate in vivo, posing long-term toxicity risks186. Second, while GNPs are generally non-toxic at low concentrations, significant cytotoxicity is observed at concentrations above 25 μmol/L187. Third, GNPs, especially of smaller sizes, tend to accumulate in healthy organs enriched with the reticuloendothelial system (RES), such as the liver, spleen, or in RES-depleted organs like the kidneys, leading to cytotoxic effects188,189. Finally, acute toxicity triggered by GNPs, including inflammation and apoptosis, has been reported in preclinical studies190,191. Consequently, limited commercial opportunities have been generated for their utilization in the medical field.

4.2 Polymeric vectors

4.2.1 Chitosan for treatment of SP-B deficiency

Chitosan is a biodegradable polymer composed of repeating d-glucosamine and N-acetyl-d-glucosamine units, exhibiting favorable biocompatibility, non-toxicity, and biodegradability192. The primary amine groups present in each d-glucosamine unit can be protonated under slightly acidic pH conditions, enabling chitosan to interact with negatively charged nucleic acids and form nano-sized complexes193. These interactions facilitate the efficient encapsulation and delivery of nucleic acids within chitosan-based systems.

In a pivotal investigation, chitosan-coated poly (lactic-co-glycolic acid) (PLGA) nanoparticles complexed with ZFN mRNA and AAV6 carrying a DNA template donor were (Fig. 3B) co-administered to the lungs of SP-B deficient mouse model119. This was the first use of non-viral materials for in vivo delivery of an endonuclease gene editing system, albeit with assistance from AAV. SP-B deficiency is a fatal disorder primarily affecting infants, where lung transplantation remains the only available treatment option194. As this autosomal recessive condition results from mutations in the SFTPB gene, gene editing offers a potential cure195. In this investigation, ZFN mRNA was loaded onto chitosan-coated PLGA nanoparticles at a weight ratio of 25:1, achieving significantly higher ZFN protein expression compared to naked mRNA delivery. Co-delivery of AAV6 with ZFN mRNA-nanoparticles resulted in approximately 28% indels in lung cells and approximately 11% HDR efficiency as compared to approximately 21% indels and 8% HDR achieved when AAV6 was co-delivered solely with ZFN mRNA alone, highlighting the ability of nanoparticles to facilitate efficient gene editing119.

Recent investigations have focused on enhancing the delivery of CRISPR-Cas9 systems using chitosan. One approach involves conjugating polyethylene glycol (PEG) to chitosan, improving performance192. Another strategy incorporates negatively charged moieties like additional NLSs to address release-related challenges196. These studies indicate that chitosan nanoparticles hold potential for enhanced safety55 and efficiency119,192,196.

However, chitosan faces inherent limitations in gene delivery efficacy due to its high molecular weight, which reduces solubility, compromises cell-specific targeting, diminishes endosomal buffering capacity, and hinders the intracellular dissociation of nucleic acid payloads. To overcome these challenges, structural or chemical modifications are essential for optimizing functionality. Moreover, clinical trials utilizing such vectors have not yet been reported, highlighting the need for further modifications to improve delivery efficiency.

4.2.2 Polymeric nanocapsules (NCs) for treatment of eye diseases

Nanoparticle technologies provide several advantages to protein delivery, including protection from premature degradation or denaturation in biological environments and improving the systemic circulation half-life of proteins with poor pharmacokinetic properties. They also enable controlled, sustained, or tunable release, maintaining drug concentrations within the therapeutic range, and facilitating targeted delivery to diseased tissues, cells, and intracellular compartments. Consequently, these advancements enhance the safety and efficacy of biologic therapeutics197,198.

To achieve stable and efficient delivery of Cas9 RNPs both in vitro and in vivo, Chen et al.163 developed NCs through in situ free-radical polymerization (Fig. 3C). NCs consisted of six key components, including cationic and anionic monomers for charge adjustment, imidazole monomers to facilitate endosomal escape, biodegradable disulfide crosslinkers sensitive to intracellular glutathione (GSH), acrylate PEG, and acrylate-PEG-ligand for interaction with RNPs, as well as outer-shell targeting ligands. The polymerization began by mixing sNLS-Cas9-sNLS protein with sgRNA, followed by dilution in sodium bicarbonate buffer and sequential monomer additions. Surface modification with all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) enhanced cellular uptake of nanoparticles in vivo. Gene editing potential was tested using Ai14 mouse models, where ATRA-NCs achieved over 4% fluorescence expression in RPE cells, compared to 1% by non-ATRA NCs after 12 days of subretinal injection. NCs also restored approximately 2% tdTomato expression in the basal lamina following intramuscular injection, whereas unencapsulated RNPs failed to induce gene deletion. In conclusion, polymeric NCs efficiently load and release RNPs, and their ability to incorporate various outer-shell ligands makes them highly adaptable for treating genetic eye and muscle diseases.

4.2.3 pH-responsive nanoparticles for the treatment of DMD

HDR-based gene correction holds promise for treating a substantial portion of DMD patients, as approximately 30% of them exhibit single-base mutations or small deletions in the dystrophin gene. However, the co-delivery of Cas9 RNP and DNA templates presents a challenge due to their distinct morphologies and surface charges. Therefore, it is essential to develop a vector capable of interacting with both Cas9 RNP and DNA donor molecules.

Xie et al.199 addressed this issue by selecting an amphiphilic copolymer, methoxy-poly(ethylene glycol)-b-poly(2-(azepan-1-yl)ethyl methacrylate) (mPEG-PC7A), which exhibits protonated and deprotonated segments at physiological pH. This copolymer facilitated the delivery of single-strand oligonucleotides (ssOND) and Cas9 RNP into the cell nucleus (Fig. 3D). In HEK293 cells, both HDR-nanoparticles and NHEJ-nanoparticles achieved high efficacy in genome editing. In mdx mouse models harboring a mutation in exon 23 of the DMD gene with impaired dystrophin formation, these nanoparticles induced HDR in 2.5% and NHEJ in 8.6% of tibialis anterior muscles, leading to notable restoration of muscle strength as well. As highlighted by the authors, this delivery strategy exhibits potential for clinical translation due to its facile fabrication process and storage stability.

4.3 Lipid-based vectors

The emergence of lipid-based vectors has opened new possibilities for the delivery of biological macromolecules in the biomedical field200, 201, 202, 203, 204. Liposomes, which are closed lipid bilayer vesicles, have been among the earliest nanomedicine delivery systems utilized in clinical settings (Fig. 4A)205. More recently, LNPs have gained attention as an upgraded version of liposomes. LNPs typically consist of four key components (Fig. 4B)206: (i) Ionizable lipids enable efficient encapsulation of cargos, enhance cellular uptake via charge-mediated membrane interactions, and facilitate endosomal escape for intracellular release. (ii) Zwitterionic phospholipids stabilize LNPs by preventing aggregation and balancing surface charge to reduce serum protein interactions, boosting delivery efficiency. (iii) PEGylated lipids extend blood circulation via a protective hydrophilic layer that minimizes immune clearance and controls nanoparticle size for optimized biodistribution. (iv) Cholesterol reinforces structural stability by filling phospholipid gaps and aiding membrane fusion206. Together, these components ensure LNPs act as biocompatible, efficient delivery vehicles with minimized therapeutic side effects.Figure 4 Structure of lipid-based vectors. (A) Cationic-liposomes. Cationic liposomes usually contain four components: PEGylated lipids, phospholipids, cholesterol, and cationic lipids. (B) Traditional LNPs have been applied in treating liver- and muscle-related genetic diseases. These LNP typically consist of PEGylated lipids, phospholipids, cholesterol, ionizable lipids, and mRNA.

Figure 4

With the advancement of gene editing technologies, cationic lipids and LNPs have successfully been employed for delivering gene editing tools in all three formats: pDNA, mRNA, and RNPs201.

4.3.1 Cationic liposomes for the treatment of HL and MPS I

In 2014, Zuris et al.165 successfully edited the mouse inner ear using nuclease-encapsulated cationic liposomes. They enhanced electrostatic interactions by fusing super negatively charged green fluorescent protein (GFP) to Cre recombinase, TALENs, and Cas9, enabling effective delivery of gene editing proteins. Using commercial reagents RNAiMAX and Lipofectamine 2000 to deliver Cas9 RNPs, they achieved 65% and 80% gene KO in U2OS human cells. Injection of Cas9 RNP-lipid complexes into mouse inner ear models resulted in a 13% gene KO, potentially aiding hearing recovery in genetic ear disease models.

In a subsequent 2018 study, the same research team advanced cationic lipid-mediated Cas9 RNP delivery to address genetic hearing loss (HL)166. Genetic HL, which severely impacts language development and social interaction, often results from mutations in the transmembrane channel-like 1 (TMC1) gene, which plays a critical role in the formation of mechanically activated channels in hair cells necessary for sensory induction207. Gao et al.166 targeted the TCM1 mutation in a Tmc1Bth/+ mouse model, which mimics human progressive HL due to a dominant mutation (p.M412K, c.T1235A). In vitro experiments involved coating spCas9 RNP with Lipofectamine 2000 and delivering the resulting complex into primary fibroblasts derived from mutant mice, leading to targeted indels reaching up to 10%. Comparing pDNA and RNP delivery, they found that RNPs had only one off-target site, while DNA transfection had nine, supporting the safety profile of RNPs. In vivo experiments entailed injecting complexes of Cas9 with sgRNA and Lipofectamine 2000 into the scala media of newborn mouse models. This resulted in 0.92% editing efficiency of TMC1 genes in the organ of Corti, which contains hair cells, and significantly improved responsiveness to stimulation at 45 kHz after four weeks of treatment for mice. The study highlights the efficient delivery methods using lipids for gene editing tools within inner ear tissues, as well as establishes feasibility for correcting genetic deafness.

Schuh et al.135 addressed MPS I using cationic liposomal carriers to deliver CRISPR-Cas9, successfully correcting Idua mutations both in vitro and in vivo. They created lipids–CRISPR-Cas9 complexes using the film dispersion method, incorporating CRISPR-Cas9 DNA and an Idua donor oligo. In fibroblasts derived from MPS I patients, these complexes restored approximately 3% normal IDUA activity after a single transfection, with sustained effects observed for over 30 days. In more rigorous in vivo experiments, they injected the complexes into the superficial temporal vein of MPS I IduaKO mice. The treated mice exhibited 4%–7% IDUA activity in the serum compared to normal mice, accompanied by reduced levels of GAGs. The study also showed improvements in cardiovascular parameters, such as left ventricular shortening fraction and systolic/diastolic diameter, which are critical since heart damage is a leading cause of mortality in MPS I. However, biodistribution studies revealed the presence of liposomal complexes in the heart, liver, lung, and spleen, indicating potential off-target effects.

In summary, cationic lipids have shown promise for in vivo gene editing. However, it is crucial to address certain limitations associated with these cationic particles, such as their positive charge and large size, which may lead to immune activation, hemolysis, and other toxic effects200. Exploring alternative approaches with better in vivo suitability is essential for advancing gene editing applications.

4.3.2 LNPs for the treatment of liver diseases

Over the past two decades, there has been a consistent increase in mortality rates attributed to liver diseases, with a rise from 3% to 3.5% of total global deaths208. Consequently, there is a pressing demand for drug delivery systems that can selectively target diseased hepatic cells while enhancing the stability of therapeutic cargos. LNP technology exhibits promise for liver targeting and treatment of hepatic disorders. Notably, ONPATTRO, the first approved nanomedicine for liver targeting, is based on LNP architecture209. This section reviews LNPs used to treat genetic liver disorders such as HT1, FH, ATTR, and HAE.

To treat HT1, Yin et al.88 combined non-viral and viral vectors to deliver a CRISPR system along with a DNA template donor for localized gene correction. They used LNPs to deliver Cas9 mRNA, enabling transient Cas9 expression, while utilizing AAV-delivered sgRNA and the HDR template to correct the Fah mutation. In 293T reporter cells, this approach achieved 80% frameshift via NHEJ and only a 13% off-target rate compared to lentiviral Cas9. In vivo, separate intravenous injections of HDR AAV and nano Cas9 in Fahmut/mut mice resulted in approximately 6% of hepatocytes regaining Fah expression, with treated liver cells exhibiting 9.5% of wild-type Fah mRNA expression.

In another study, Song et al.47 used LNPs to deliver optimized mRNA encoding an ABE and sgRNA to restore FAH expression in diseased hepatocytes. As previously mentioned, ABEs are ideal for correcting G > A point mutations in Fahmut/mut mice. The study showed that intravenous administration of LNP-ABE mRNA and LNP-sgRNA three to four times resulted in approximately 0.8% Fah+ hepatic cells 5 days after treatment. Although LNPs did not exhibit comparable efficiency to the alternative approach in this study, they nonetheless demonstrated the potential for non-viral delivery of ABEs in liver-based treatments and genetic disease correction.

PCSK9, crucial for modulating cholesterol levels, has gained attention in cardiovascular health. Gain-of-function mutations in PCSK9 reduce LDLR expression, raising LDL-C levels210. Therefore, in 2017, Yin et al.94 used LNP complexes to edit the PCSK9 gene in hepatocytes of C57BL/6 mice. The LNP formulation consisted of two chemically-modified sgRNAs and Cas9 mRNA. Remarkably, they achieved approximately 83% editing efficiency of the PCSK9 gene in the liver and undetectable serum PCSK9 levels after a single intravenous injection94. This study was the first to demonstrate a fully non-viral carrier for in vivo gene editing. Liu et al.95 later developed a biodegradable LNP formulation with disulfide bonds for efficient Cas9 mRNA and sgRNA release, targeting hepatocytes to reduce PCSK9 levels by about 20%.

To address off-target risks and translate ABEs from laboratory to clinical applications, Rothgangl et al.48 injected ABE-encoding mRNA and PCSK9-targeting sgRNA in mice and macaques, achieving 50.9% editing efficiency in mice after a single injection and 67.3% after re-treatment. In macaques, the gene-editing system achieved approximately 27.6% on-target editing (A > G) in the PCSK9 gene after a single dose, leading to a 26% reduction in serum PCSK9 levels and a 9% reduction in LDL levels compared to baseline. While no ABE-specific antibodies were detected in mice, they were found in macaques, possibly limiting further editing. These findings support the clinical potential of LNP-encapsulated ABEs for treating familial hypercholesterolemia. In another study, Musunuru et al.96 used LNPs with ABE mRNA and PCSK9 gRNA to edit the PCSK9 gene in cynomolgus monkeys, achieving a remarkable 90% reduction in PCSK9 and a 60% reduction in LDL-C levels in the blood. This led to the development of VERVE-101 (Verve Therapeutics), an LNP complex currently in clinical trial (NCT05398029). One year after administration, LDL-C was reduced by 68%, and blood PCSK9 level was reduced by about 89%167. These studies offer valuable insights into PCSK9 regulation for FH treatment and other cardiovascular diseases.

Standard LNPs utilize the LDLR-mediated endocytosis pathway for cellular entry, but this is limited in patients with homozygous familial hypercholesterolemia (HoFH) due to the lack of functional LDLR. Kasiewicz et al.168 investigated the delivery of the ABE system to the liver. GalNAc-LNPs effectively delivered the ABE system to the liver independent of LDLR, editing the ANGPTL3 gene in LDLR-KO NHP models. A single administration of GalNAc-LNPs led to a remarkable 89% reduction in ANGPTL3 protein levels and a significant 35% decrease in blood LDL-C concentrations in the NHP model, suggesting GalNAc-LNPs as a promising tool for HoFH patients.

PKU is an autosomal recessive metabolic liver disease. Villiger et al.50 utilized AAV-based CBE systems to correct PKU mouse models, but due to AAV’s limited capacity, they employed a split CBE approach, successfully reducing blood L-Phe levels. Nevertheless, CBEs can induce severe off-target mutations, prompting a shift to transient expression using LNP-delivered CBE mRNA. Thus, another study proposed minimizing the duration of CBE as a solution to mitigate this problem171. The authors shifted their focus from AAV to LNPs and utilized mRNA formulation of CBEs for the transient expression. By delivering CBE mRNA and sgRNA using LNPs, transient gene editing achieved a 21% conversion from C > T in hepatocytes, with 10.8% of reads supporting PAH restoration after treating the PKU mice twice a week172.

Silencing the TTR gene in hepatocytes is a promising therapeutic strategy for hereditary ATTR amyloidosis169. Finn et al.170 introduced an LNP-based approach for TTR editing using single particles complexed with Cas9 mRNA and gRNA for simultaneous delivery. A single administration reduced serum TTR levels by over 97%, sustained for 12 months. NTLA-2001, further evaluated in NHPs, achieved over 60% liver editing and eliminated more than 95% of circulating TTR169. Encouraged by these results, NTLA-2001 entered clinical trial (NCT04601051), showing 52% and 87% reductions in serum TTR levels after low-dose and high-dose administrations, respectively (Fig. 5A–C)100. The Phase III study of NTLA-2001 has been initiated (NCT06128629), with further clinical results anticipated to bring this treatment closer to the bedside.Figure 5 In vivo pharmacologic properties of NTLA-2001 and NTLA-2002 in patients. (A–C) Mechanism of action and in vivo pharmacologic properties of NTLA-2001100. (A) A schematic illustration depicts the primary components of NTLA-2001 and the transport of the NTLA-2001 LNP into hepatocytes. The active components of NTLA-2001 are an mRNA molecule encoding SpCas9 protein and an sgRNA molecule specific to the human gene encoding TTR. After intravenous administration of NTLA-2001 and its entry into the circulation, the LNP is opsonized by apolipoprotein E (ApoE) and transported directly through the systemic circulation into the liver. NTLA-2001 is then expected to undergo uptake by the LDLR, which is expressed on the surface of the hepatocytes. (B) Change in serum TTR concentration in patients who received 0.1 mg/kg NTLA-2001. (C) Change in serum TTR concentration in patients who received 0.3 mg/kg NTLA-2001. (D, E) Components and in vivo pharmacologic properties of NTLA-2002173. (D) A schematic illustration shows the primary components of NTLA-2002. (E) Change from baseline in the total plasma kallikrein protein level according to NTLA-2002 dose.

Figure 5

NTLA-2002 is a CRISPR-Cas9-based gene-editing therapy for HAE, targeting the KLKB1 gene in the liver to reduce plasma kallikrein levels and prevent angioedema attacks (Fig. 5D)173. Using liver-targeting LNP technology, NTLA-2002 encapsulates Cas9 mRNA and sgRNA specific to the KLKB1 gene, enabling precise genetic modifications in the liver. A Phase 1/2 clinical study (NCT05120830) demonstrated a favorable safety profile with significant reductions in plasma kallikrein levels and angioedema attack frequency. NTLA-2002 maintained plasma kallikrein reductions of 67% in the 25-mg group, 84% in the 50-mg group, and 95% in the 75-mg group. Angioedema attack frequency decreased by 91%, 97%, and 80% in the respective groups. LNP LP000001 was detectable in plasma for up to 15 days, underscoring the importance of LNPs in sustained NTLA-2002 delivery (Fig. 5E).

4.3.3 SORT for the treatment of lung diseases

The selective organ targeting (SORT) strategy enables precise delivery of therapeutic cargos, including mRNA, Cas9 mRNA/single guide RNA, and Cas9 RNP, to specific organs such as the lungs, spleen, and liver (Fig. 6A)211. To explore in vivo gene editing in lung stem cells for genetic lung diseases, such as CF, Sun et al.125 utilized lung-targeting SORT LNPs to deliver ABE8e mRNA and sgRNA for correcting the R553X mutation in CF mouse models. The researchers first co-encapsulated ABE mRNA and sgR553X to target the R553X mutation in primary human bronchial epithelial (HBE) cells from CF patients with compound heterozygous mutations of R553X-F508del. They achieved an average correction rate of 83.7% for the desired product with only moderate bystander editing. In mouse models, LNP-ABE treatment was administered to heterozygous R553X mice carrying one allele with the humanized R553X mutation and one normal mouse CFTR allele. 10 days post-treatment, they observed a 50.0% correction at the targeted position in lung stem cells, 12.2% in the entire lung, and 28.7% in the trachea. This study demonstrated that lung-targeting SORT LNPs can effectively deliver BEs to lungs while genomic editing in lung stem cells presents a promising long-term therapeutic strategy for genetic lung diseases.Figure 6 LNP engineering strategies for tissue-specific delivery. (A) Selective Organ Targeting (SORT) LNPs. Incorporating a fifth SORT molecule into a conventional four-component LNP redirects gene-editing cargos to the liver, lung, or spleen211. (B) Covalently cross-linked LNPs. Introducing a cross-linkable lipid into the five-component base formulation yields covalent LNPs that achieve broad bone-marrow mRNA delivery and genome editing across 14 hematopoietic cell types, including HSCs, progenitors, and immune cells174.

Figure 6

4.3.4 LNPs for the treatment of DMD

Ionized cationic LNPs are popular vehicles for gene editing due to their ability to undergo charge reversal in neutral extracellular fluid before cellular uptake and ionization in low-pH endosomes for membrane fusion. However, encapsulating Cas9 RNPs into LNPs is challenging due to the need for acidic conditions, which can denature Cas9. Wei et al.82 addressed this by introducing permanently cationic lipids, such as 1,2-dioleoyl-3-trimethylammonium-propane (DOTAP), into LNPs. Through evaluation using a GFP reporter assay, these optimized LNPs demonstrated approximately 80.9% indels after 5 days of co-incubation with GFP-HeLa cell lines. By adjusting the molar percentages of DOTAP, the LNP complexes exhibited organ targeting from liver to lung, which is particularly useful for targeted gene editing in specific organs. In a DMD exon 44 deletion mouse model, immunofluorescence analysis confirmed that injection of RNPs-encapsulated LNPs into tibialis anterior muscles led to the restoration of dystrophin expression. The strategy was also effective across various LNP types, including stable nucleic acid lipid particles and lipid-like nanoparticles, for gene editing in brain and liver tissues. This study advances RNP packaging methodology and provides an effective strategy for organ-selective RNP delivery.

4.3.5 LNPs for the treatment of SCD

Daniel et al.174 utilized bone-marrow (BM)-homing LNPs to edit hematopoietic stem cells, reactivating fetal hemoglobin and converting sickle to non-sickle alleles in a mouse model of SCD (HBBS/S mice). To target cells within the BM niche, covalent-bond-forming lipid species were incorporated into the LNPs, enhancing surface enrichment of proteins like apolipoprotein E (ApoE) for BM delivery (Fig. 6B). This design improved transfection efficiency across various BM cell types, including HSCs, progenitor cells, B cells, T cells, macrophages, monocytes, neutrophils, and endothelial cells. CRISPR-Cas9 gene editing was utilized to disrupt the BCL11A binding motif and induce fetal hemoglobin production in HBBS/S mice. After two intravenous injections of BM-homing LNPs containing Cas9 mRNA and sgRNA, mutations were detected in HSPCs within 7 days. Indels were present in 5.2% of alleles within hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells (HSPCs). In another approach, ABE8e_NRCH was used to convert the sickle cell disease allele to the non-pathogenic Makassar allele. NGS revealed that 2.43% of the sickle cell disease alleles were converted to the Makassar allele by injecting BM-homing LNPs into mice. These findings suggest a novel therapeutic strategy for treating SCD and provide insights into the development of targeted treatments for genetic blood disorders.

4.3.6 LNPs for the treatment of eye diseases

In vivo genome editing with RNPs is safer than using viral Cas9 systems, but transient RNP activity often results in suboptimal editing. In a more recent study, Hołubowicz et al.175 developed LNP formulations optimized for enhanced delivery of RNP complexes to treat inherited retinal degeneration caused by Rpe65 mutations in a mouse model (rd12 mice). The efficiency of delivering RNPs was further enhanced by cell-penetrating peptides (CPP), either covalently fused to the protein or used as excipients, while the LNPs were optimized to improve RNP stability, delivery efficiency, and editing potency. Through optimization, the team achieved over a 300-fold increase in in vivo editing efficiency compared to the delivery of naked RNPs. These optimized LNPs encapsulated ABE and PE, demonstrating successful delivery and editing within the RPE. Following subretinal injections, precise genomic corrections were observed, with a notable restoration of visual function as evidenced by improvements in electrophysiological responses, including the pupillary light reflex and cortical activity.

4.3.7 Current safety concerns and challenges of LNPs

LNP-based delivery enables precise, organ-targeted gene editing, offering a versatile platform for treating genetic diseases. However, challenges remain in their application. LNPs can stimulate innate immunity, which influences adaptive immune responses and may lead to diverse effects, such as autoimmune reactions and inflammation212. The existing LNP vaccines have shown systemic side effects such as pain, inflammation, and, in rare cases, myocarditis and/or pericarditis213. The lipid components, such as PEGylated lipids, may activate immune responses, causing inflammation, complement activation, and antibody production214. Additionally, cationic lipids can induce cell damage and inflammation through interactions with cellular membranes215. Commercial-scale production of LNPs faces further obstacles, including the need to meet strict regulatory standards and the difficulty of scaling up manufacturing processes. Addressing these issues requires continued innovation in LNP design to enhance their effectiveness and safety for mRNA delivery applications.

4.4 VLPs

Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are nanoscale particles released by cells and play a crucial role in intercellular communication during various physiological and pathological processes216,217. These versatile vesicles serve as carriers for diverse cellular cargo, encompassing a wide range of molecules, including proteins, nucleic acids, and soluble small molecules217. Furthermore, specific components within EVs possess inherent cargo transport capabilities that enable tissue-targeted delivery216. Given these intrinsic characteristics, researchers have been intrigued to explore the potential of EVs as a platform for drug delivery218.

In addition to the natural release of EVs from parental cells, certain viral pathogens propagate virions into the extracellular environment using EV biogenesis mechanisms219. Research into viral biogenesis and assembly has paved the way for the development of VLPs. These particles are typically produced by expressing viral structural proteins in recombinant systems (Fig. 7A). VLPs composed of one or more viral scaffolds capable of self-assembly without containing viral genetics (Fig. 7B)220. By harnessing several key viral characteristics, VLPs offer efficient delivery systems, including targeting specific cell types, effective internalization in cells, and evasion of endosomal degradation, making them ideal for the temporary delivery of gene editing machinery for the treatment of genetic disorders219,221. Currently, VLPs have been used in preclinical trials to treat genetic diseases through subretinal injection, intramuscular injection, and intravenous injection (Fig. 7C).Figure 7 The production, structure, and application of VLPs. (A) Schematics of VLPs production from producer cells. (B) Schematics of VLPs. VLPs usually contain viral glycoproteins, matrix proteins, binding proteins, and genome editing proteins and/or RNA, such as Cas9 RNP. (C) VLPs have been utilized for delivering gene editing tools to eyes, muscles, and circulatory system to treat genetic diseases.

Figure 7

4.4.1 VLPs for the treatment of DMD

Gee et al.176 developed a novel EV delivery system, NanoMEDIC, for transporting spCas9 and sgRNAs to induce dystrophin exon 45 skipping in patient-derived induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) with DMD. Exon 45 skipping has the potential to restore the reading frame in DMD patients lacking exon 44222. The researchers utilized an FKBP12 and FRB dimerization system to encapsulate the spCas9 protein, while selecting Gag as a candidate for packaging sgRNA. Additionally, they expressed vesicular stomatitis virus glycoprotein (VSV-G) on the surface of EVs to enhance broad tropism. The producer cells used for generating NanoMEDIC were 293T cells. By designing two sgRNAs targeting splicing acceptor and donor sites, NanoMEDIC achieved an impressive deletion of 92% of exon 45 in Δexon 44 DMD iPSCs. In luciferase reporter mice, the injection of NanoMEDIC into the gastrocnemius muscle consistently resulted in gene skipping for more than 160 days. In another study, Yao et al.49 used aptamers for selective enrichment of RNPs within EVs. They facilitated fusion between Cas9 and CD63, abundant in exosomes. Administration of EVs encapsulating RNPs targeting DMD exon 53 into Δexon 52 DMD mouse models resulted in an approximate induction of 0.2% indels in the tibialis anterior muscle.

4.4.2 VLPs for the treatment of eye diseases

Age-related macular degeneration (AMD) is a prevalent cause of blindness worldwide, affecting approximately 20% of the elderly population. Wet AMD involves neovascularization-induced damage to the neural retina. Ling et al.177 investigated the therapeutic potential of VLP-mediated delivery for targeted suppression of vascular endothelial growth factor A gene (Vegfa) using the CRISPR-Cas9 system in the treatment of AMD. They created an all-in-one VLP vector by transfecting 293T cells with plasmids for Cas9 mRNA and gRNA. Cas9 was fused with the MS2 stem-loop, and the Gag polyprotein (Gag-Pol) facilitated the packaging of the gRNA cassette. Following subretinal injection and a 14-day observation period, Ling et al.177 observed a reduction in VEGFA levels to approximately 10 pg/mL in the RPE-choroid-scleral (RCS) complex compared to approximately 40 pg/mL in the control group. Pre-treatment with VLP-CRISPR also prevented choroidal neovascularization, with no immune response detected in the treated mice.

In another investigation, Banskota et al.178 used VLPs to restore visual function in mouse models of LCA, a genetic disease characterized by retinal degeneration and blindness178,223. Mutations in the RPE65 gene account for approximately 6% of all LCA cases, making it a promising target for in vivo gene editing interventions223. Banskota and colleagues178 developed engineered DNA-free VLPs (eVLPs) using the murine leukemia virus (MLV) Gag-Pol as scaffolds. ABE was tethered to the Gag-Pol via a linker peptide, which undergoes cleavage during particle maturation. Additionally, the researchers modified the eVLPs with nuclear export signals (NESs), along with conventional NLSs, to ensure cytoplasmic localization in the producer cells. In the LCA mouse model harboring a nonsense mutation in exon 3 of Rpe65, ABE-eVLPs facilitated a significant on-target A·T > G·C conversion rate of 21% in RPE tissue five weeks post-injection, surpassing the 11.5% correction achieved by lentivirus encoding ABEs. The system’s versatility was further demonstrated by its ability to correct mutations in the central nervous system and knock out PCSK9 in the liver.

These studies highlight the potential of genetically engineered VLPs as efficient carriers for RNA-based CRISPR-Cas9 and ABE systems, offering promising therapeutic strategies for inherited eye diseases.

4.4.3 VLP for treatment of HT1

Mangeot et al.179 presented two potential strategies for the treatment of HT1 utilizing a novel type of MLV-based VLPs named Nanoblades. By fusing spCas9 to the C-terminal end of the Gag protein and co-transfecting HEK-293T cells with plasmids containing all the necessary components, they successfully packaged the Cas9 RNP complex within the Nanoblades. Firstly, they efficiently edit the Tyr gene in embryos, with an efficiency of 16 out of 40. After embryo transplantation, 5 out of 8 F0 mice exhibited varying degrees of Tyr disruption, demonstrating the potential of Nanoblades for in vivo gene editing applications. Secondly, they investigated in vivo editing targeting the HPD gene. Through retro-orbital injection, Nanoblades achieved editing efficiencies ranging from 7% to 13% in vivo224. Overall, this study demonstrates an efficient delivery method for Cas9 and sgRNA using flexible and easily prepared VLPs.

4.4.4 Comparison of VLPs to other non-viral vectors

VLPs are particularly attractive among non-viral systems because (i) they mimic the structure and function of viruses, enabling selective binding to target cells or tissues, which improves their delivery efficiency, and (ii) they naturally or through engineering (e.g., RGD peptide insertion) facilitate precise, cell-specific delivery. Meanwhile, they still face challenges compared to other non-viral vectors (e.g., LNPs). First, VLPs often trigger stronger immune responses due to viral structural proteins. While this immunogenicity enables VLPs to induce both antibody-mediated and cell-mediated immune responses, making them a potent vaccine platform, it may also limit their suitability for repeated dosing225,226. In contrast, LNPs generally exhibit lower immunogenicity. Second, VLPs have limited cargo capacity, struggling to deliver large CRISPR/Cas9 systems as single constructs. The use of split-Cas9 dual-vector systems can bypass this limitation177, and recent advancements in VLPs have progressively addressed this issue178,227. LNPs better accommodate large nucleic acids like full-length Cas9 mRNA, though encapsulation efficiency drops for oversized payloads. Third, VLP production is costlier and complex, relying on protein expression in mammalian/insect cells and precise assembly. LNPs, synthesized via scalable chemical methods (e.g., microfluidics), are more industrial-friendly.

In conclusion, VLPs excel in targeting accuracy and transfection efficiency, whereas LNPs prioritize modular design and scalability. In clinical trials for the treatment of genetic diseases, VLPs have not yet yielded positive results as LNPs have. However, VLPs have demonstrated convincing efficacy in Human papillomavirus vaccines. Thus, we still anticipate that VLPs will demonstrate promising potential in delivering genome editors for the treatment of genetic diseases in the future.

4.5 Delivery methods for treating specific genetic diseases

In the above examples, we have highlighted the potential of non-viral delivery methods in treating genetic diseases. We briefly summarize the key features, advantages, and limitations of various non-viral delivery platforms, such as LNPs, exosomes, and viral vectors (e.g., AAVs), in Table 4. Because of the unique features of these delivery systems, selecting the appropriate vector is crucial depending on the target organ for specific genetic disorders.Table 4 Comparison of delivery methods for treating genetic diseases.

Table 4Feature	AAV	Inorganic vector	Polymeric vector	Lipid-based vector	Virus-like particle	
Safety	Potential risks like immunogenicity and harmful transgene insertion	Generally biocompatible, but may accumulate in certain organs	Biocompatible and biodegradable	Potential immune response issues, but less severe than viral vectors	Immunogenicity can be an issue due to viral protein content	
Cargo restriction	Limited capacity for large genetic materials	No limit	No limit	No limit	Limited cargo capacity, but advancements are helping improve this	
Transfection efficiency	High efficiency	Generally lower than viral vectors, but improves with modification	Generally lower compared to viral vectors, but improves with modifications	Generally good, especially for mRNA delivery	Better than other non-viral systems, but lower than viral vectors	
Targeting capability	Can be engineered to target specific tissues or cells	Can be modified to target specific tissues, though less precise than viral vectors	Efficient transfection of lungs and spleen; weaker hepatic tropism	Efficient transfection of hepatocytes; spleen and lungs transfection	Excellent targeting precision	
Advantages	High transduction efficiency; cell/tissue tropism; long-term expression for diseases requires durable editing	Scalable fabrication; flexibility in loading different molecules	Biodegradable; self-assembly; easy surface modification with ligands	Great biocompatibility; ability to deliver larger payloads	Highly targeted delivery; suitable for temporary gene delivery	
Limitations	Immunogenicity; harmful transgene insertion; limited cargo capacity	Accumulation in organs; non-biodegradable; potential toxicity issues	Slower elimination of high-molecular-weight variants; difficulty in scaling up due to polydispersity	Potential toxicity, especially in higher doses; unstable output and loading efficiency	Higher cost of production; limited cargo capacity; potential immune responses	
Abbreviations: AAV, adeno-associated virus.

LNPs are particularly effective for genetic diseases affecting the liver, as they predominantly distribute to the liver through systemic administration. LNPs can deliver genome editors to the liver via the ApoE–LDLR pathway, which has shown substantial success in treating conditions like ATTR (NCT06128629) and HAE (NCT05120830). Furthermore, SORT LNPs, which are administered via intravenous injection, have enabled selective lung transfection by incorporating a fifth component into the conventional LNP system, improving mRNA delivery specifically to the lungs in CF and other pulmonary disorders125,211. LNPs also hold promise for treating genetic diseases in other organs. For example, SORT LNPs can target the spleen to treat related conditions. In the case of eye diseases, ocular delivery of Cas9 RNP using LNPs228 has shown potential for safer gene editing by transiently expressing nuclease activity. Although non-viral delivery systems encounter significant challenges in treating brain diseases due to the blood–brain barrier (BBB), preclinical studies have demonstrated the feasibility of LNPs for brain tissue editing82,229. This may be attributed to the high drug loading capacity of LNPs, which makes them promising even with relatively low uptake into brain tissue.

VLPs are another promising non-viral system, offering efficient transfection and targeted delivery due to their virus-like structure. The eye is easily accessible in clinical settings and is isolated from the systemic immune system, making it suitable for VLPs, which have certain immunogenicity. By engineering envelope proteins for specific targeting, VLPs can precisely deliver gene editing therapies directly to retinal cells, offering promising treatments for inherited retinal conditions. For example, recent studies highlight VLPs as efficient carriers for RNA-based CRISPR-Cas9177 and ABE178 systems in ocular disease treatment. For hepatic disease, VLPs have shown potential in correcting liver genes for downregulating PCSK9 levels and treating HT1178,179. Regarding brain diseases, research has demonstrated that incorporating CPPs provides a viable strategy for VLPs to cross the BBB230. In general, VLPs are suitable for treating diseases that can be addressed through localized delivery or targeted to specific cell types.

In addition to LNPs and VLPs, polymeric vectors are promising gene delivery systems due to their structural diversity. Their customizable features—including adjustable molecular weight, copolymerization potential, and stereoregularity—provide extensive flexibility for tailored gene therapy designs231. For systemic delivery strategies, specialized nanoparticle formulations are being developed for liver-targeted and lung-targeted treatments231,232. Localized delivery strategies using polymeric vectors have also demonstrated therapeutic efficacy: intratracheal injection of chitosan has been used to treat SP-B deficiency119, while intratracheal injection of polymeric nanoparticles has successfully edited RPE cells163. Furthermore, inorganic nanoparticles, exemplified by CRISPR-Gold technology, have shown potential in delivering the CRISPR-Cas9 system for neurological153 and muscular diseases164. However, caution is warranted regarding GNPs, as their non-biodegradable nature raises concerns about potential bioaccumulation.

5 Summary and future perspectives

Genetic disorders present significant challenges, with many still lacking approved treatments. These diseases often lead to severe, life-threatening symptoms early in life. While conventional treatments, like small-molecule drugs and enzyme replacement therapies, have been developed for several genetic disorders, they are not applicable to all genetic diseases. Most of these therapies only manage symptoms rather than addressing the underlying cause and often require ongoing, repetitive administration, placing a substantial burden on patients. Genome editing has the potential to correct disease-causing germline mutations, providing new treatment opportunities for genetic diseases. AAV vectors have been extensively investigated as carriers for delivering gene editing drugs5,92,118,233,234. However, AAVs face challenges such as limited packaging capacity, detrimental transgene integration, off-target effects, and high production costs5,235.

In recent years, non-viral vectors, especially LNPs, have emerged as promising alternatives due to their increased loading capacities and favorable safety profiles. Recent advancements have made these non-viral vectors more feasible for clinical applications. For example, NTLA-2002 utilized liver-targeting LNPs to deliver CRISPR-Cas9 for editing the KLKB1 gene, successfully reducing total plasma kallikrein levels in HAE patients during a phase 1/2 clinical study (NCT05120830)173. Similarly, NTLA-2001 utilized LNP delivery to edit the TTR gene in the livers of ATTR amyloidosis patients, resulting in decreased serum TTR levels while demonstrating a good safety profile, which led to its progression into a phase 3 study (NCT06128629)169.

To advance the clinical application of non-viral vectors for treating genetic diseases, several key issues must be addressed, including off-target effects, gene editing efficiency and specificity, and potential immune responses. Future research can address these issues by improving gene editing tools and designing rational non-viral delivery vectors. Off-target genome editing occurs when CRISPR-induced DNA cleavage and repair take place at unintended genome locations, often resembling the intended editing target’s sequence. Additionally, undesired genomic editing outcomes can arise from diverse DNA repair mechanisms following on-target DNA cleavage in different cells. These events may lead to serious consequences236, 237, 238, 239. To mitigate these risks, several Cas9 variants have been developed to minimize off-target effects while maintaining efficiency240, 241, 242. In addition, some new technologies provide alternatives to traditional CRISPR-based genome editing methods. For example, Durrant et al.243 introduced a novel bridge RNA system enabling direct DNA recombination through a compact RNA-guided recombinase, thereby expanding the toolkit for treating genetic diseases involving large deletions. Other considerations include the immunogenicity of bacterial editing proteins, pre-existing antibodies against CRISPR components, and uncertainties regarding the long-term safety and stability of genome editing results. However, the immunogenicity issues can be managed through high-efficiency one-time treatments or alternative enzymes. Additionally, ex vivo editing therapies, like those for sickle cell disease, are less affected, as residual CRISPR components decay naturally in edited cells. These strategies, along with protocol optimization, help mitigate potential immune responses244.

To improve therapeutic outcomes, it is crucial to not only use advanced editing tools to minimize off-target effects and enhance editing efficiency but also to rationally design delivery vectors that target specific organs and improve transfection efficiency. Currently, non-viral delivery systems are primarily used for hepatic diseases and vaccines due to their liver accumulation. Therefore, overcoming the liver tropism of nanoparticles while targeting other organs becomes crucial231. For example, the SORT strategy of LNPs involves specific components called SORT molecules that modify the in vivo delivery profile of LNPs, enabling precise targeting of organs such as the lungs, spleen, and liver. In addition, incorporating nanomaterials responsive to disease-specific conditions could further enhance their accumulation at the target site. For example, Xu et al.245 employed a poly(disulfide) and a liver-specific promoter to establish a dual liver-specific Cas-mediated DNA or RNA editing system. In another study, Chen et al.246 designed a nanoCRISPR comprising cationic polymer-coated Au nanorods, heat-shock promoter-driven Cas9 plasmids, and heat-shock factors to precisely control gene editing by fine-tuning NIR radiation time. In addition to these bioresponsive systems, several comprehensive reviews also explore additional strategies247,248.

Transfection efficiency, especially strategies for endosomal escape, is another concern for the translation of non-viral delivery systems from bench to bedside. The benefits of biomimetic vectors offer new perspectives on gene editing tool delivery methods. As highlighted in this review, VLPs combine high infection efficiencies of viral vectors with transient features associated with mRNA, protein, and RNP delivery, potentially leading to efficient and safe genome editing249,250. In a recent study, Kreitz et al.251 developed an extracellular contractile injection system (eCISs), which utilizes a syringe-like mechanism for direct protein delivery, including CRISPR-Cas9, directly into target cells. By recognizing specific receptors on the cell surface with engineered tail fibers, eCISs inject payloads through sheath contraction, enhancing delivery efficiency by bypassing the endosomal pathway and allowing targeted delivery to specific cell types.

In summary, as shown by examples summarized in this review, non-viral delivery of genome editing tools has emerged as a robust alternative for the treatment of genetic diseases. The CRISPR-Cas technologies have undergone significant development and optimization, resulting in the creation of powerful gene-editing tools such as BEs, PEs, and RNA editing. Pairing these gene editing tools with efficient non-viral delivery systems, including inorganic vectors, polymeric vectors, lipid-based vectors, and VLPs, has enabled a range of gene editing applications to treat genetic diseases, from proof-of-concept studies in animal models to successful therapeutic outcomes in humans. Though immunogenicity and safety remain concerns of CRISPR-based therapies, we envision that the advancements in Cas9 variants and other genome-editing modifications offer solutions to mitigate these risks. Continued development of more efficient and specific delivery vectors, along with the refinement of gene editing methods, will accelerate the progress of non-viral gene editing therapies to realize their full potential in treating human genetic diseases.

Author contributions

Yuan Ping and Xiaohong Chen conceptualized and supervised the work. Jiamin Yang and Yuxuan Chen wrote the draft. All authors contributed to the discussion and writing of this manuscript.

Conflicts of interest

Yuan Ping is a scientific cofounder of Ruidax. The other authors declare no competing interests.

Acknowledgments

This work was supported by the 10.13039/501100012166 National Key Research and Development Program of China (2023YFC3403200, Xiaohong Chen), 10.13039/501100001809 National Natural Science Foundation of China (32301165 10.13039/501100004731 Natural Science Foundation of Zhejiang Province (LQ24H300004, Xiaohong Chen, China).

Peer review under the responsibility of Chinese Pharmaceutical Association and Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences.


References

1 Stark Z. Scott R.H. Genomic newborn screening for rare diseases Nat Rev Genet 24 2023 755 766 37386126 10.1038/s41576-023-00621-w
2 Boemer F. Hovhannesyan K. Piazzon F. Minner F. Mni M. Jacquemin V. Population-based, first-tier genomic newborn screening in the maternity ward Nat Med 31 2025 1339 1350 39875687 10.1038/s41591-024-03465-x PMC12003153
3 Tambuyzer E. Vandendriessche B. Austin C.P. Brooks P.J. Larsson K. Miller Needleman K.I. Therapies for rare diseases: therapeutic modalities, progress and challenges ahead Nat Rev Drug Discov 19 2020 93 111 31836861 10.1038/s41573-019-0049-9
4 Sayed N. Allawadhi P. Khurana A. Singh V. Navik U. Pasumarthi S.K. Gene therapy: comprehensive overview and therapeutic applications Life Sci 294 2022 120375 10.1016/j.lfs.2022.120375 35123997
5 Li C.W. Samulski R.J. Engineering adeno-associated virus vectors for gene therapy Nat Rev Genet 21 2020 255 272 32042148 10.1038/s41576-019-0205-4
6 Wang J.Y. Doudna J.A. CRISPR technology: a decade of genome editing is only the beginning Science 379 2023 eadd8643 10.1126/science.add8643 36656942
7 Raguram A. Banskota S. Liu D.R. Therapeutic in vivo delivery of gene editing agents Cell 185 2022 2806 2827 35798006 10.1016/j.cell.2022.03.045 PMC9454337
8 Chen P.J. Liu D.R. Prime editing for precise and highly versatile genome manipulation Nat Rev Genet 24 2023 161 177 36344749 10.1038/s41576-022-00541-1 PMC10989687
9 Tao J.L. Bauer D.E. Chiarle R. Assessing and advancing the safety of CRISPR-Cas tools: from DNA to RNA editing Nat Commun 14 2023 212 36639728 10.1038/s41467-023-35886-6 PMC9838544
10 Villiger L. Joung J. Koblan L. Weissman J. Abudayyeh O.O. Gootenberg J.S. CRISPR technologies for genome, epigenome and transcriptome editing Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 25 2024 464 487 38308006 10.1038/s41580-023-00697-6
11 Newby G.A. Liu D.R. In vivo somatic cell base editing and prime editing Mol Ther 29 2021 3107 3124 34509669 10.1016/j.ymthe.2021.09.002 PMC8571176
12 Taha E.A. Lee J. Hotta A. Delivery of CRISPR-Cas tools for in vivo genome editing therapy: trends and challenges J Control Release 342 2022 345 361 35026352 10.1016/j.jconrel.2022.01.013
13 Ou L. DeKelver R.C. Rohde M. Tom S. Radeke R. St M.S.J. ZFN-mediated in vivo genome editing corrects murine Hurler syndrome Mol Ther 27 2019 178 187 30528089 10.1016/j.ymthe.2018.10.018 PMC6319315
14 Ou L. Przybilla M.J. Ahlat O. Kim S. Overn P. Jarnes J. A highly efficacious PS gene editing system corrects metabolic and neurological complications of mucopolysaccharidosis type I Mol Ther 28 2020 1442 1454 32278382 10.1016/j.ymthe.2020.03.018 PMC7264433
15 Laoharawee K. DeKelver R.C. Podetz-Pedersen K.M. Rohde M. Sproul S. Nguyen H.O. Dose-dependent prevention of metabolic and neurologic disease in murine MPS II by ZFN-mediated in vivo genome editing Mol Ther 26 2018 1127 1136 29580682 10.1016/j.ymthe.2018.03.002 PMC6080131
16 Maeder M.L. Stefanidakis M. Wilson C.J. Baral R. Barrera L.A. Bounoutas G.S. Development of a gene-editing approach to restore vision loss in Leber congenital amaurosis type 10 Nat Med 25 2019 229 233 30664785 10.1038/s41591-018-0327-9
17 Tong S. Moyo B. Lee C.M. Leong K. Bao G. Engineered materials for in vivo delivery of genome-editing machinery Nat Rev Mater 4 2019 726 737 34094589 10.1038/s41578-019-0145-9 PMC8174554
18 Lehrman S. Virus treatment questioned after gene therapy death Nature 401 1999 517 518 10524611 10.1038/43977
19 Kohn D.B. Sadelain M. Glorioso J.C. Occurrence of leukaemia following gene therapy of X-linked SCID Nat Rev Cancer 3 2003 477 488 12835668 10.1038/nrc1122
20 Yi K. Kong H.M. Lao Y.-H. Li D. Mintz R.L. Fang T.X. Engineered nanomaterials to potentiate CRISPR/Cas9 gene editing for cancer therapy Adv Mater 36 2024 2300665 10.1002/adma.202300665 37437039
21 Xu Z.K. Wang Q.N. Zhong H.P. Jiang Y.Y. Shi X.G. Yuan B. Carrier strategies boost the application of CRISPR/Cas system in gene therapy Explorations 2 2022 20210081 10.1002/EXP.20210081 PMC10190933 37323878
22 Rui Y. Wilson D.R. Green J.J. Non-viral delivery to enable genome editing Trends Biotechnol 37 2019 281 293 30278987 10.1016/j.tibtech.2018.08.010 PMC6378131
23 Kim Y.G. Cha J. Chandrasegaran S. Hybrid restriction enzymes: zinc finger fusions to Fok I cleavage domain Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 93 1996 1156 1160 8577732 10.1073/pnas.93.3.1156 PMC40048
24 Miller J. McLachlan A.D. Klug A. Repetitive zinc-binding domains in the protein transcription factor IIIA from Xenopus oocytes EMBO J 4 1985 1609 1614 4040853 10.1002/j.1460-2075.1985.tb03825.x PMC554390
25 Vanamee E.S. Santagata S. Aggarwal A.K. FokI requires two specific DNA sites for cleavage J Mol Biol 309 2001 69 78 11491302 10.1006/jmbi.2001.4635
26 Urnov F.D. Rebar E.J. Holmes M.C. Zhang H.S. Gregory P.D. Genome editing with engineered zinc finger nucleases Nat Rev Genet 11 2010 636 646 20717154 10.1038/nrg2842
27 Miller J.C. Tan S.Y. Qiao G.J. Barlow K.A. Wang J.B. Xia D.F. A TALE nuclease architecture for efficient genome editing Nat Biotechnol 29 2011 143 148 21179091 10.1038/nbt.1755
28 Boch J. Scholze H. Schornack S. Landgraf A. Hahn S. Kay S. Breaking the code of DNA binding specificity of TAL-type III effectors Science 326 2009 1509 1512 19933107 10.1126/science.1178811
29 Moscou M.J. Bogdanove A.J. A simple cipher governs DNA recognition by TAL effectors Science 326 2009 1501 19933106 10.1126/science.1178817
30 Joung J.K. Sander J.D. TALENs: a widely applicable technology for targeted genome editing Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 14 2013 49 55 23169466 10.1038/nrm3486 PMC3547402
31 Jinek M. Chylinski K. Fonfara I. Hauer M. Doudna J.A. Charpentier E. A programmable dual-RNA-guided DNA endonuclease in adaptive bacterial immunity Science 337 2012 816 821 22745249 10.1126/science.1225829 PMC6286148
32 Cong L.E. Ran F.A. Cox D. Lin S.L. Barretto R. Habib N. Multiplex genome engineering using CRISPR/Cas systems Science 339 2013 819 823 23287718 10.1126/science.1231143 PMC3795411
33 Jinek M. East A. Cheng A. Lin S. Ma E. Doudna J. RNA-programmed genome editing in human cells eLife 2 2013 e00471 10.7554/eLife.00471 PMC3557905 23386978
34 Pacesa M. Pelea O. Jinek M. Past, present, and future of CRISPR genome editing technologies Cell 187 2024 1076 1100 38428389 10.1016/j.cell.2024.01.042
35 Gaj T. Gersbach C.A. Barbas C.F.R. ZFN, TALEN, and CRISPR/Cas-based methods for genome engineering Trends Biotechnol 31 2013 397 405 23664777 10.1016/j.tibtech.2013.04.004 PMC3694601
36 Zetsche B. Gootenberg J.S. Abudayyeh O.O. Slaymaker I.M. Makarova K.S. Essletzbichler P. Cpf1 is a single RNA-guided endonuclease of a class 2 CRISPR-Cas system Cell 163 2015 759 771 26422227 10.1016/j.cell.2015.09.038 PMC4638220
37 Fonfara I. Richter H. Bratovic M. Le Rhun A. Charpentier E. The CRISPR-associated DNA-cleaving enzyme Cpf1 also processes precursor CRISPR RNA Nature 532 2016 517 521 27096362 10.1038/nature17945
38 Chen J.S. Ma E.B. Harrington L.B. Costa M.D. Tian X.R. Palefsky J.M. CRISPR-Cas12a target binding unleashes indiscriminate single-stranded DNase activity Science 360 2018 436 439 29449511 10.1126/science.aar6245 PMC6628903
39 Rees H.A. Liu D.R. Base editing: precision chemistry on the genome and transcriptome of living cells Nat Rev Genet 19 2018 770 788 30323312 10.1038/s41576-018-0059-1 PMC6535181
40 Komor A.C. Kim Y.B. Packer M.S. Zuris J.A. Liu D.R. Programmable editing of a target base in genomic DNA without double-stranded DNA cleavage Nature 533 2016 420 424 27096365 10.1038/nature17946 PMC4873371
41 Gaudelli N.M. Komor A.C. Rees H.A. Packer M.S. Badran A.H. Bryson D.I. Programmable base editing of A∗T to G∗C in genomic DNA without DNA cleavage Nature 551 2017 464 471 29160308 10.1038/nature24644 PMC5726555
42 Anzalone A.V. Koblan L.W. Liu D.R. Genome editing with CRISPR–Cas nucleases, base editors, transposases and prime Nat Biotechnol 38 2020 824 844 32572269 10.1038/s41587-020-0561-9
43 Richter M.F. Zhao K.T. Eton E. Lapinaite A. Newby G.A. Thuronyi B.W. Phage-assisted evolution of an adenine base editor with improved Cas domain compatibility and activity Nat Biotechnol 38 2020 883 891 32433547 10.1038/s41587-020-0453-z PMC7357821
44 Komor A.C. Zhao K.T. Packer M.S. Gaudelli N.M. Waterbury A.L. Koblan L.W. Improved base excision repair inhibition and bacteriophage Mu Gam protein yields C:G-to-T:A base editors with higher efficiency and product purity Sci Adv 3 2017 eaao4774 10.1126/sciadv.aao4774 PMC5576876 28875174
45 Grunewald J. Zhou R.H. Iyer S. Lareau C.A. Garcia S.P. Aryee M.J. CRISPR DNA base editors with reduced RNA off-target and self-editing activities Nat Biotechnol 37 2019 1041 1048 31477922 10.1038/s41587-019-0236-6 PMC6730565
46 Walton R.T. Christie K.A. Whittaker M.N. Kleinstiver B.P. Unconstrained genome targeting with near-PAMless engineered CRISPR-Cas9 variants Science 368 2020 290 296 32217751 10.1126/science.aba8853 PMC7297043
47 Song C.Q. Jiang T.T. Richter M. Rhym L.H. Koblan L.W. Zafra M.P. Adenine base editing in an adult mouse model of tyrosinaemia Nat Biomed Eng 4 2020 125 130 31740768 10.1038/s41551-019-0357-8 PMC6986236
48 Rothgangl T. Dennis M.K. Lin P.J.C. Oka R. Witzigmann D. Villiger L. In vivo adenine base editing of PCSK9 in macaques reduces LDL cholesterol levels Nat Biotechnol 39 2021 949 957 34012094 10.1038/s41587-021-00933-4 PMC8352781
49 Yao X.G. Lyu P. Yoo K. Yadav M.K. Singh R. Atala A. Engineered extracellular vesicles as versatile ribonucleoprotein delivery vehicles for efficient and safe CRISPR genome editing J Extracell Vesicles 10 2021 e12076 10.1002/jev2.12076 PMC7962171 33747370
50 Villiger L. Grisch-Chan H.M. Lindsay H. Ringnalda F. Pogliano C.B. Allegri G. Treatment of a metabolic liver disease by in vivo genome base editing in adult mice Nat Med 24 2018 1519 1525 30297904 10.1038/s41591-018-0209-1
51 Auton A. Brooks L.D. Durbin R.M. Garrison E.P. Kang H.M. Korbel J.O. A global reference for human genetic variation Nature 526 2015 68 74 26432245 10.1038/nature15393 PMC4750478
52 Porteus M.H. Connelly J.P. Pruett S.M. A look to future directions in gene therapy research for monogenic diseases PLoS Genet 2 2006 e133 10.1371/journal.pgen.0020133 PMC1584267 17009872
53 Anzalone A.V. Randolph P.B. Davis J.R. Sousa A.A. Koblan L.W. Levy J.M. Search-and-replace genome editing without double-strand breaks or donor DNA Nature 576 2019 149 157 31634902 10.1038/s41586-019-1711-4 PMC6907074
54 Chen P.J. Hussmann J.A. Yan J. Knipping F. Ravisankar P. Chen P.-F. Enhanced prime editing systems by manipulating cellular determinants of editing outcomes Cell 184 2021 5635–52.e29 10.1016/j.cell.2021.09.018 PMC8584034 34653350
55 Doman J.L. Pandey S. Neugebauer M.E. An M.R. Davis J.R. Randolph P.B. Phage-assisted evolution and protein engineering yield compact, efficient prime editors Cell 186 2023 3983 4002.e26 37657419 10.1016/j.cell.2023.07.039 PMC10482982
56 Yan J. Oyler-Castrillo P. Ravisankar P. Ward C.C. Levesque S. Jing Y.W.D. Improving prime editing with an endogenous small RNA-binding protein Nature 628 2024 639 647 38570691 10.1038/s41586-024-07259-6 PMC11023932
57 Zhu G.L. Zhou X.Z. Wen M.Z. Qiao J.J. Li G. Yao Y. CRISPR-Cas13: pioneering RNA editing for nucleic acid therapeutics Biodes Res 6 2024 41 10.34133/bdr.0041 PMC11371277 39228750
58 Abudayyeh O.O. Gootenberg J.S. Konermann S. Joung J. Slaymaker I.M. Cox D.B.T. C2c2 is a single-component programmable RNA-guided RNA-targeting CRISPR effector Science 353 2016 aaf5573 10.1126/science.aaf5573 PMC5127784 27256883
59 Abudayyeh O.O. Gootenberg J.S. Essletzbichler P. Han S. Joung J. Belanto J.J. RNA targeting with CRISPR-Cas13 Nature 550 2017 280 284 28976959 10.1038/nature24049 PMC5706658
60 Tong H.W. Huang J. Xiao Q.Q. He B.B. Dong X. Liu Y.H. High-fidelity Cas13 variants for targeted RNA degradation with minimal collateral effects Nat Biotechnol 41 2023 108 119 35953673 10.1038/s41587-022-01419-7
61 Xu C.L. Zhou Y.S. Xiao Q.Q. He B.B. Geng G.N. Wang Z.K. Programmable RNA editing with compact CRISPR-Cas13 systems from uncultivated microbes Nat Methods 18 2021 499 506 33941935 10.1038/s41592-021-01124-4
62 Cox D.B.T. Gootenberg J.S. Abudayyeh O.O. Franklin B. Kellner M.J. Joung J. RNA editing with CRISPR-Cas13 Science 358 2017 1019 1027 29070703 10.1126/science.aaq0180 PMC5793859
63 Abudayyeh O.O. Gootenberg J.S. Franklin B. Koob J. Kellner M.J. Ladha A. A cytosine deaminase for programmable single-base RNA editing Science 365 2019 382 386 31296651 10.1126/science.aax7063 PMC6956565
64 Brokowski C. Adli M. CRISPR ethics: moral considerations for applications of a powerful tool J Mol Biol 431 2019 88 101 29885329 10.1016/j.jmb.2018.05.044 PMC6286228
65 Zhang D.B. Hussain A. Manghwar H. Xie K.B. Xie S.S. Zhao S.H. Genome editing with the CRISPR-Cas system: an art, ethics and global regulatory perspective Plant Biotechnol J 18 2020 1651 1669 32271968 10.1111/pbi.13383 PMC7336378
66 Xu X.J. Wan T. Xin H.H. Li D. Pan H.M. Wu J. Delivery of CRISPR/Cas9 for therapeutic genome editing J Gene Med 21 2019 e3107 10.1002/jgm.3107 31237055
67 FDA approves hereditary blindness gene therapy Nat Biotechnol 36 2018 6 10.1038/nbt0118-6a 29319697
68 Miller N. Glybera and the future of gene therapy in the European Union Nat Rev Drug Discov 11 2012 419 10.1038/nrd3572-c1 22679644
69 Dabbous O. Maru B. Jansen J.P. Lorenzi M. Cloutier M. Guerin A. Survival, motor function, and motor milestones: comparison of AVXS-101 relative to nusinersen for the treatment of infants with spinal muscular atrophy type 1 Adv Ther 36 2019 1164 1176 30879249 10.1007/s12325-019-00923-8 PMC6824368
70 Kim S. Kim D. Cho S.W. Kim J. Kim J.S. Highly efficient RNA-guided genome editing in human cells via delivery of purified Cas9 ribonucleoproteins Genome Res 24 2014 1012 1019 24696461 10.1101/gr.171322.113 PMC4032847
71 Hemmi H. Takeuchi O. Kawai T. Kaisho T. Sato S. Sanjo H. A toll-like receptor recognizes bacterial DNA Nature 408 2000 740 745 11130078 10.1038/35047123
72 Eoh J. Gu L. Biomaterials as vectors for the delivery of CRISPR-Cas9 Biomater Sci 7 2019 1240 1261 30734775 10.1039/c8bm01310a
73 Miller J.B. Zhang S.Y. Kos P. Xiong H. Zhou K.J. Perelman S.S. Non-viral CRISPR/Cas gene editing in vitro and in vivo enabled by synthetic nanoparticle co-delivery of Cas9 mRNA and sgRNA Angew Chem Int Ed Engl 56 2017 1059 1063 27981708 10.1002/anie.201610209 PMC5521011
74 Shen G.B. Liu J. Yang H.M. Xie N. Yang Y. mRNA therapies: pioneering a new era in rare genetic disease treatment J Control Release 369 2024 696 721 38580137 10.1016/j.jconrel.2024.03.056
75 Chaudhary N. Weissman D. Whitehead K.A. mRNA vaccines for infectious diseases: principles, delivery and clinical translation Nat Rev Drug Discov 20 2021 817 838 34433919 10.1038/s41573-021-00283-5 PMC8386155
76 Zarghampoor F. Azarpira N. Khatami S.R. Behzad-Behbahani A. Foroughmand A.M. Improved translation efficiency of therapeutic mRNA Gene 707 2019 231 238 31063797 10.1016/j.gene.2019.05.008
77 Willis E. Pardi N. Parkhouse K. Mui B.L. Tam Y.K. Weissman D. Nucleoside-modified mRNA vaccination partially overcomes maternal antibody inhibition of de novo immune responses in mice Sci Transl Med 12 2020 eaav5701 10.1126/scitranslmed.aav5701 PMC7339908 31915303
78 Jinek M. Jiang F.G. Taylor D.W. Sternberg S.H. Kaya E. Ma E.B. Structures of Cas9 endonucleases reveal RNA-mediated conformational activation Science 343 2014 1247997 10.1126/science.1247997 PMC4184034 24505130
79 Liang X.Q. Potter J. Kumar S. Zou Y.F. Quintanilla R. Sridharan M. Rapid and highly efficient mammalian cell engineering via Cas9 protein transfection J Biotechnol 208 2015 44 53 26003884 10.1016/j.jbiotec.2015.04.024
80 Liu J. Gaj T. Yang Y.F. Wang N. Shui S.L. Kim S. Efficient delivery of nuclease proteins for genome editing in human stem cells and primary cells Nat Protoc 10 2015 1842 1859 26492140 10.1038/nprot.2015.117
81 Mout R. Ray M. Lee Y.W. Scaletti F. Rotello V.M. In vivo delivery of CRISPR/Cas9 for therapeutic gene editing: progress and challenges Bioconjug Chem 28 2017 880 884 28263568 10.1021/acs.bioconjchem.7b00057 PMC5846329
82 Wei T. Cheng Q. Min Y.L. Olson E.N. Siegwart D.J. Systemic nanoparticle delivery of CRISPR-Cas9 ribonucleoproteins for effective tissue specific genome editing Nat Commun 11 2020 3232 32591530 10.1038/s41467-020-17029-3 PMC7320157
83 Maestro S. Weber N.D. Zabaleta N. Aldabe R. Gonzalez-Aseguinolaza G. Novel vectors and approaches for gene therapy in liver diseases JHEP Rep 3 2021 100300 10.1016/j.jhepr.2021.100300 PMC8203845 34159305
84 Russo P.A. Mitchell G.A. Tanguay R.M. Tyrosinemia: a review Pediatr Dev Pathol 4 2001 212 221 11370259 10.1007/s100240010146
85 VanLith C. Guthman R. Nicolas C.T. Allen K. Du Z.J. Joo D.J. Curative ex vivo hepatocyte-directed gene editing in a mouse model of hereditary tyrosinemia type 1 Hum Gene Ther 29 2018 1315 1326 29764210 10.1089/hum.2017.252 PMC6247987
86 Rossidis A.C. Stratigis J.D. Chadwick A.C. Hartman H.A. Ahn N.J. Li H.Y. In utero CRISPR-mediated therapeutic editing of metabolic genes Nat Med 24 2018 1513 1518 30297903 10.1038/s41591-018-0184-6 PMC6249685
87 Aponte J.L. Sega G.A. Hauser L.J. Dhar M.S. Withrow C.M. Carpenter D.A. Point mutations in the murine fumarylacetoacetate hydrolase gene: animal models for the human genetic disorder hereditary tyrosinemia type 1 Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 98 2001 641 645 11209059 10.1073/pnas.98.2.641 PMC14641
88 Yin H. Song C.Q. Dorkin J.R. Zhu L.J. Li Y.X. Wu Q.Q. Therapeutic genome editing by combined viral and non-viral delivery of CRISPR system components in vivo Nat Biotechnol 34 2016 328 333 26829318 10.1038/nbt.3471 PMC5423356
89 Parsamanesh N. Kooshkaki O. Siami H. Santos R.D. Jamialahmadi T. Sahebkar A. Gene and cell therapy approaches for familial hypercholesterolemia: an update Drug Discov Today 28 2023 103470 10.1016/j.drudis.2022.103470 36572377
90 Meshkov A. Ershova A. Kiseleva A. Zotova E. Sotnikova E. Petukhova A. The LDLR, APOB, and PCSK9 variants of index patients with familial hypercholesterolemia in Russia Genes 12 2021 66 33418990 10.3390/genes12010066 PMC7825309
91 Reddy L.L. Shah S.A.V. Ponde C.K. Dalal J.J. Jatale R.G. Dalal R.J. Screening of PCSK9 and LDLR genetic variants in Familial Hypercholesterolemia (FH) patients in India J Hum Genet 66 2021 983 993 33864011 10.1038/s10038-021-00924-y
92 Zhao H. Li Y. He L.J. Pu W.J. Yu W. Li Y. In vivo AAV-CRISPR/Cas9-mediated gene editing ameliorates atherosclerosis in familial hypercholesterolemia Circulation 141 2020 67 79 31779484 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.119.042476
93 Vanhoye X. Janin A. Caillaud A. Rimbert A. Venet F. Gossez M. APOB CRISPR-Cas9 engineering in hypobetalipoproteinemia: a promising tool for functional studies of novel variants Int J Mol Sci 23 2022 4281 35457099 10.3390/ijms23084281 PMC9030618
94 Yin H. Song C.Q. Suresh S. Wu Q.Q. Walsh S. Rhym L.H. Structure-guided chemical modification of guide RNA enables potent non-viral in vivo genome editing Nat Biotechnol 35 2017 1179 1187 29131148 10.1038/nbt.4005 PMC5901668
95 Liu J. Chang J. Jiang Y. Meng X.D. Sun T.M. Mao L.Q. Fast and efficient CRISPR/Cas9 genome editing in vivo enabled by bioreducible lipid and messenger RNA nanoparticles Adv Mater 31 2019 e1902575 10.1002/adma.201902575 PMC6732788 31215123
96 Musunuru K. Chadwick A.C. Mizoguchi T. Garcia S.P. DeNizio J.E. Reiss C.W. In vivo CRISPR base editing of PCSK9 durably lowers cholesterol in primates Nature 593 2021 429 434 34012082 10.1038/s41586-021-03534-y
97 Ando Y. Coelho T. Berk J.L. Cruz M.W. Ericzon B.G. Ikeda S. Guideline of transthyretin-related hereditary amyloidosis for clinicians Orphanet J Rare Dis 8 2013 31 23425518 10.1186/1750-1172-8-31 PMC3584981
98 Gertz M.A. Benson M.D. Dyck P.J. Grogan M. Coelho T. Cruz M. Diagnosis, prognosis, and therapy of transthyretin amyloidosis J Am Coll Cardiol 66 2015 2451 2466 26610878 10.1016/j.jacc.2015.09.075
99 Roessler H.I. Knoers N. van Haelst M.M. van Haaften G. Drug repurposing for rare diseases Trends Pharmacol Sci 42 2021 255 267 33563480 10.1016/j.tips.2021.01.003
100 Gillmore J.D. Gane E. Taubel J. Kao J. Fontana M. Maitland M.L. CRISPR-Cas9 in vivo gene editing for transthyretin amyloidosis N Engl J Med 385 2021 493 502 34215024 10.1056/NEJMoa2107454
101 Dohrn M.F. Ihne S. Hegenbart U. Medina J. Zuchner S.L. Coelho T. Targeting transthyretin-mechanism-based treatment approaches and future perspectives in hereditary amyloidosis J Neurochem 156 2021 802 818 33155274 10.1111/jnc.15233
102 Busse Paula J. Christiansen Sandra C. Hereditary angioedema N Engl J Med 382 2020 1136 1148 32187470 10.1056/NEJMra1808012
103 Bork K. Anderson J.T. Caballero T. Craig T. Johnston D.T. Li H.H. Assessment and management of disease burden and quality of life in patients with hereditary angioedema: a consensus report Allergy Asthma Clin Immunol 17 2021 40 33875020 10.1186/s13223-021-00537-2 PMC8056543
104 Fijen L.M. Riedl M.A. Bordone L. Bernstein J.A. Raasch J. Tachdjian R. Inhibition of prekallikrein for hereditary angioedema N Engl J Med 386 2022 1026 1033 35294812 10.1056/NEJMoa2109329
105 Burgard P. Ullrich K. Ballhausen D. Hennermann J.B. Hollak C.E.M. Langeveld M. Issues with European guidelines for phenylketonuria Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol 5 2017 681 683 28842158 10.1016/S2213-8587(17)30201-2
106 Vockley J. Andersson H.C. Antshel K.M. Braverman N.E. Burton B.K. Frazier D.M. Phenylalanine hydroxylase deficiency: diagnosis and management guideline Genet Med 16 2014 188 200 24385074 10.1038/gim.2013.157
107 Richards D.Y. Winn S.R. Dudley S. Nygaard S. Mighell T.L. Grompe M. AAV-mediated CRISPR/Cas9 gene editing in murine phenylketonuria Mol Ther, Methods Clin Dev 17 2020 234 245 31970201 10.1016/j.omtm.2019.12.004 PMC6962637
108 Yin S.M. Ma L. Shao T.T. Zhang M. Guan Y.T. Wang L.R. Enhanced genome editing to ameliorate a genetic metabolic liver disease through co-delivery of adeno-associated virus receptor Sci China Life Sci 65 2022 718 730 32815069 10.1007/s11427-020-1744-6
109 Brooks D.L. Whittaker M.N. Qu P. Musunuru K. Ahrens-Nicklas R.C. Wang X. Efficient in vivo prime editing corrects the most frequent phenylketonuria variant, associated with high unmet medical need Am J Hum Genet 110 2023 2003 2014 37924808 10.1016/j.ajhg.2023.10.005 PMC10716342
110 Stoltz David A. Meyerholz David K. Welsh Michael J. Origins of cystic fibrosis lung disease N Engl J Med 372 2015 351 362 25607428 10.1056/NEJMra1300109 PMC4916857
111 Graeber S.Y. Mall M.A. The future of cystic fibrosis treatment: from disease mechanisms to novel therapeutic approaches Lancet 402 2023 1185 1198 37699417 10.1016/S0140-6736(23)01608-2
112 Whitsett J.A. Weaver T.E. Hydrophobic surfactant proteins in lung function and disease N Engl J Med 347 2002 2141 2148 12501227 10.1056/NEJMra022387
113 Wan T. Ping Y. Delivery of genome-editing biomacromolecules for treatment of lung genetic disorders Adv Drug Deliv Rev 168 2021 196 216 32416111 10.1016/j.addr.2020.05.002
114 Nogee L.M. Wert S.E. Proffit S.A. Hull W.M. Whitsett J.A. Allelic heterogeneity in hereditary surfactant protein B (SP-B) deficiency Am J Respir Crit Care Med 161 2000 973 981 10712351 10.1164/ajrccm.161.3.9903153
115 Dunbar A.E. Wert S.E. Ikegami M. Whitsett J.A. Hamvas A. White F.V. Prolonged survival in hereditary surfactant protein B (SP-B) deficiency associated with a novel splicing mutation Pediatr Res 48 2000 275 282 10960490 10.1203/00006450-200009000-00003
116 Kormann M.S.D. Hasenpusch G. Aneja M.K. Nica G. Flemmer A.W. Herber-Jonat S. Expression of therapeutic proteins after delivery of chemically modified mRNA in mice Nat Biotechnol 29 2011 154 157 21217696 10.1038/nbt.1733
117 Barnett R.C. Lin X. Barravecchia M. Norman R.A. de Mesy Bentley K.L. Fazal F. Featured article: electroporation-mediated gene delivery of surfactant protein B (SP-B) restores expression and improves survival in mouse model of SP-B deficiency Exp Biol Med 242 2017 1345 1354 10.1177/1535370217713000 PMC5529004 28581337
118 Kang M.H. van Lieshout L.P. Xu L.Q. Domm J.M. Vadivel A. Renesme L. A lung tropic AAV vector improves survival in a mouse model of surfactant B deficiency Nat Commun 11 2020 3929 32764559 10.1038/s41467-020-17577-8 PMC7414154
119 Mahiny A.J. Dewerth A. Mays L.E. Alkhaled M. Mothes B. Malaeksefat E. In vivo genome editing using nuclease-encoding mRNA corrects SP-B deficiency Nat Biotechnol 33 2015 584 586 25985262 10.1038/nbt.3241
120 Amaral M.D. Harrison P.T. Development of novel therapeutics for all individuals with CF (the future goes on) J Cyst Fibros 22 2023 S45 S49 36319570 10.1016/j.jcf.2022.10.007
121 Taylor-Cousar J.L. Robinson P.D. Shteinberg M. Downey D.G. CFTR modulator therapy: transforming the landscape of clinical care in cystic fibrosis Lancet 402 2023 1171 1184 37699418 10.1016/S0140-6736(23)01609-4
122 Krishnamurthy S. Traore S. Cooney A.L. Brommel C.M. Kulhankova K. Sinn Patrick L. Functional correction of CFTR mutations in human airway epithelial cells using adenine base editors Nucleic Acids Res 49 2021 10558 10572 34520545 10.1093/nar/gkab788 PMC8501978
123 Geurts M.H. de Poel E. Amatngalim G.D. Oka R. Meijers F.M. Kruisselbrink E. CRISPR-based adenine editors correct nonsense mutations in a cystic fibrosis organoid biobank Cell Stem Cell 26 2020 503–10.e7 10.1016/j.stem.2020.01.019 32084388
124 Geurts M.H. de Poel E. Pleguezuelos-Manzano C. Oka R. Carrillo L. Andersson-Rolf A. Evaluating CRISPR-based prime editing for cancer modeling and CFTR repair in organoids Life Sci Alliance 4 2021 e202000940 10.26508/lsa.202000940 PMC8356249 34373320
125 Sun Y.H. Chatterjee S. Lian X.Z. Traylor Z. Sattiraju S.R. Xiao Y.F. In vivo editing of lung stem cells for durable gene correction in mice Science 384 2024 1196 1202 38870301 10.1126/science.adk9428 PMC12208706
126 Dumont N.A. Wang Y.X. von Maltzahn J. Pasut A. Bentzinger C.F. Brun C.E. Dystrophin expression in muscle stem cells regulates their polarity and asymmetric division Nat Med 21 2015 1455 1463 26569381 10.1038/nm.3990 PMC4839960
127 Ervasti J.M. Campbell K.P. Membrane organization of the dystrophin–glycoprotein complex Cell 66 1991 1121 1131 1913804 10.1016/0092-8674(91)90035-w
128 Petrof B.J. Shrager J.B. Stedman H.H. Kelly A.M. Sweeney H.L. Dystrophin protects the sarcolemma from stresses developed during muscle contraction Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 90 1993 3710 3714 8475120 10.1073/pnas.90.8.3710 PMC46371
129 Roberts T.C. Wood M.J.A. Davies K.E. Therapeutic approaches for Duchenne muscular dystrophy Nat Rev Drug Discov 22 2023 917 934 37652974 10.1038/s41573-023-00775-6
130 Tabebordbar M. Zhu K.X. Cheng J.K.W. Chew W.L. Widrick J.J. Yan W.X. In vivo gene editing in dystrophic mouse muscle and muscle stem cells Science 351 2016 407 411 26721686 10.1126/science.aad5177 PMC4924477
131 Nelson C.E. Hakim C.H. Ousterout D.G. Thakore P.I. Moreb E.A. Castellanos R.R.M. In vivo genome editing improves muscle function in a mouse model of Duchenne muscular dystrophy Science 351 2016 403 407 26721684 10.1126/science.aad5143 PMC4883596
132 Hanson B. Wood M.J.A. Roberts T.C. Molecular correction of Duchenne muscular dystrophy by splice modulation and gene editing RNA Biol 18 2021 1048 1062 33472516 10.1080/15476286.2021.1874161 PMC8216187
133 Gilbert L.A. Larson M.H. Morsut L. Liu Z.R. Brar G.A. Torres S.E. CRISPR-mediated modular RNA-guided regulation of transcription in eukaryotes Cell 154 2013 442 451 23849981 10.1016/j.cell.2013.06.044 PMC3770145
134 Fachel F.N.S. Frâncio L. Poletto É. Schuh R.S. Teixeira H.F. Giugliani R. Gene editing strategies to treat lysosomal disorders: the example of mucopolysaccharidoses Adv Drug Deliv Rev 191 2022 114616 10.1016/j.addr.2022.114616 36356930
135 Schuh R.S. Poletto E. Pasqualim G. Tavares A.M.V. Meyer F.S. Gonzalez E.A. In vivo genome editing of mucopolysaccharidosis I mice using the CRISPR/Cas9 system J Control Release 288 2018 23 33 30170069 10.1016/j.jconrel.2018.08.031
136 Giugliani R. Federhen A. Rojas M.V. Vieira T. Artigalas O. Pinto L.L. Mucopolysaccharidosis I, II, and VI: brief review and guidelines for treatment Genet Mol Biol 33 2010 589 604 21637564 10.1590/S1415-47572010005000093 PMC3036139
137 D’Avanzo F. Rigon L. Zanetti A. Tomanin R. Mucopolysaccharidosis type II: one hundred years of research, diagnosis, and treatment Int J Mol Sci 22 2020 12558 10.3390/ijms21041258 PMC7072947 32070051
138 Muenzer J. Burton B.K. Kampmann C. Botha J. Jones S.A. Characteristics of patients with mucopolysaccharidosis type II who have received a bone marrow transplant: data from the Hunter Outcome Survey Mol Genet Metabol 126 2019 S104
139 Harmatz P. Lampe C. Parini R. Sharma R. Leão-Teles E. Johnson J. Enzyme replacement therapy in patients with mucopolysaccharidosis type VI: updated findings from the MPS VI clinical surveillance program Mol Genet Metabol 126 2019 S68 10.1016/j.ymgme.2019.06.008 31324526
140 Berger W. Kloeckener-Gruissem B. Neidhardt J. The molecular basis of human retinal and vitreoretinal diseases Prog Retin Eye Res 29 2010 335 375 20362068 10.1016/j.preteyeres.2010.03.004
141 Anand V. Duffy B. Yang Z.X. Dejneka N.S. Maguire A.M. Bennett J. A deviant immune response to viral proteins and transgene product is generated on subretinal administration of adenovirus and adeno-associated virus Mol Ther 5 2002 125 132 11829519 10.1006/mthe.2002.0525
142 Yu W.H. Wu Z.J. Ocular delivery of CRISPR/Cas genome editing components for treatment of eye diseases Adv Drug Deliv Rev 168 2021 181 195 32603815 10.1016/j.addr.2020.06.011
143 Choi E.H. Suh S. Sears A.E. Hołubowicz R. Kedhar S.R. Browne A.W. Genome editing in the treatment of ocular diseases Exp Mol Med 55 2023 1678 1690 37524870 10.1038/s12276-023-01057-2 PMC10474087
144 Pierce E.A. Aleman T.S. Ashimatey B. Kim K. Rashid R. Myers R. Safety and efficacy of EDIT-101 for treatment of CEP290-associated retinal degeneration Investig Ophthalmol Vis Sci 64 2023 3785
145 Ding N. Lee S. Lieber-Kotz M. Yang J. Gao X. Advances in genome editing for genetic hearing loss Adv Drug Deliv Rev 168 2021 118 133 32387678 10.1016/j.addr.2020.05.001 PMC7647959
146 Lieu J.E.C. Kenna M. Anne S. Davidson L. Hearing loss in children: a review JAMA 324 2020 2195 2205 33258894 10.1001/jama.2020.17647
147 György B. Nist-Lund C. Pan B.F. Asai Y. Karavitaki K.D. Kleinstiver B.P. Allele-specific gene editing prevents deafness in a model of dominant progressive hearing loss Nat Med 25 2019 1123 1130 31270503 10.1038/s41591-019-0500-9 PMC6802276
148 Ryu N. Kim M.A. Choi D.G. Kim Y.R. Sonn J.K. Lee K.Y. CRISPR/Cas9-mediated genome editing of splicing mutation causing congenital hearing loss Gene 703 2019 83 90 30898719 10.1016/j.gene.2019.03.020
149 Mianné J. Chessum L. Kumar S. Aguilar C. Codner G. Hutchison M. Correction of the auditory phenotype in C57BL/6N mice via CRISPR/Cas9-mediated homology directed repair Genome Med 8 2016 16 26876963 10.1186/s13073-016-0273-4 PMC4753642
150 Yeh W.H. Chiang H. Rees H.A. Edge A.S.B. Liu D.R. In vivo base editing of post-mitotic sensory cells Nat Commun 9 2018 2184 29872041 10.1038/s41467-018-04580-3 PMC5988727
151 Xue Y.Y. Tao Y. Wang X. Wang X.L. Shu Y.L. Liu Y.H. RNA base editing therapy cures hearing loss induced by OTOF gene mutation Mol Ther 31 2023 3520 3530 37915172 10.1016/j.ymthe.2023.10.019 PMC10727966
152 Hagerman R.J. Berry-Kravis E. Hazlett H.C. Bailey D.B. Jr. Moine H. Kooy R.F. Fragile X syndrome Nat Rev Dis Primers 3 2017 17065 10.1038/nrdp.2017.65 28960184
153 Lee B. Lee K. Panda S. Gonzales-Rojas R. Chong A. Bugay V. Nanoparticle delivery of CRISPR into the brain rescues a mouse model of fragile X syndrome from exaggerated repetitive behaviours Nat Biomed Eng 2 2018 497 507 30948824 10.1038/s41551-018-0252-8 PMC6544395
154 Richter J.D. Zhao X.Y. The molecular biology of FMRP: new insights into fragile X syndrome Nat Rev Neurosci 22 2021 209 222 33608673 10.1038/s41583-021-00432-0 PMC8094212
155 Berry-Kravis E.M. Lindemann L. Jonch A.E. Apostol G. Bear M.F. Carpenter R.L. Drug development for neurodevelopmental disorders: lessons learned from fragile X syndrome Nat Rev Drug Discov 17 2018 280 299 29217836 10.1038/nrd.2017.221 PMC6904225
156 Park C.Y. Halevy T. Lee D.R. Sung J.J. Lee J.S. Yanuka O. Reversion of FMR1 methylation and silencing by editing the triplet repeats in fragile X iPSC-derived neurons Cell Rep 13 2015 234 241 26440889 10.1016/j.celrep.2015.08.084
157 Liu X.S. Wu H. Krzisch M. Wu X.B. Graef J. Muffat J. Rescue of fragile X syndrome neurons by DNA methylation editing of the FMR1 Gene Cell 172 2018 979–92.e6 10.1016/j.cell.2018.01.012 PMC6375087 29456084
158 Howard J. Ataga K.I. Brown R.C. Achebe M. Nduba V. El-Beshlawy A. Voxelotor in adolescents and adults with sickle cell disease (HOPE): long-term follow-up results of an international, randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, phase 3 trial Lancet Haematol 8 2021 e323 e333 33838113 10.1016/S2352-3026(21)00059-4
159 Eaton W.A. Hofrichter J. Hemoglobin S gelation and sickle cell disease Blood 70 1987 1245 1266 3311198
160 Akinyanju O.O. A profile of sickle cell disease in Nigeria Ann N Y Acad Sci 565 1989 126 136 2672962 10.1111/j.1749-6632.1989.tb24159.x
161 Adikusuma F. Piltz S. Corbett M.A. Turvey M. McColl S.R. Helbig K.J. Large deletions induced by Cas9 cleavage Nature 560 2018 E8 E9 30089922 10.1038/s41586-018-0380-z
162 Ma L.L. Yang S.L. Peng Q.Y. Zhang J.P. Zhang J. CRISPR/Cas9-based gene-editing technology for sickle cell disease Gene 874 2023 147480 10.1016/j.gene.2023.147480 37182559
163 Chen G.J. Abdeen A.A. Wang Y.Y. Shahi P.K. Robertson S. Xie R.S. A biodegradable nanocapsule delivers a Cas9 ribonucleoprotein complex for in vivo genome editing Nat Nanotechnol 14 2019 974 980 31501532 10.1038/s41565-019-0539-2 PMC6778035
164 Lee K.W. Conboy M. Park H.M. Jiang F. Kim H.J. Dewitt M.A. Nanoparticle delivery of Cas9 ribonucleoprotein and donor DNA in vivo induces homology-directed DNA repair Nat Biomed Eng 1 2017 889 901 29805845 10.1038/s41551-017-0137-2 PMC5968829
165 Zuris J.A. Thompson D.B. Shu Y.L. Guilinger J.P. Bessen J.L. Hu J.H. Cationic lipid-mediated delivery of proteins enables efficient protein-based genome editing in vitro and in vivo Nat Biotechnol 33 2015 73 80 25357182 10.1038/nbt.3081 PMC4289409
166 Gao X. Tao Y. Lamas V. Huang M.Q. Yeh W.H. Pan B.F. Treatment of autosomal dominant hearing loss by in vivo delivery of genome editing agents Nature 553 2018 217 221 29258297 10.1038/nature25164 PMC5784267
167 Lee R.G. Mazzola A.M. Braun M.C. Platt C. Vafai S.B. Kathiresan S. Efficacy and safety of an investigational single-course CRISPR base-editing therapy targeting PCSK9 in nonhuman primate and mouse models Circulation 147 2023 242 253 36314243 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.122.062132
168 Kasiewicz L.N. Biswas S. Beach A. Ren H.L. Dutta C. Mazzola A.M. GalNAc-lipid nanoparticles enable non-LDLR dependent hepatic delivery of a CRISPR base editing therapy Nat Commun 14 2023 2776 37188660 10.1038/s41467-023-37465-1 PMC10185539
169 Wood K. Melissa P. Jessica S. Noah G. Seth A. Tracy D. Development of NTLA-2001, a CRISPR/Cas9 genome editing therapeutic for the treatment of ATTR Life Med 1 2019 49 51
170 Finn J.D. Smith A.R. Patel M.C. Shaw L. Youniss M.R. van Heteren J. A single administration of CRISPR/Cas9 lipid nanoparticles achieves robust and persistent in vivo genome editing Cell Rep 22 2018 2227 2235 29490262 10.1016/j.celrep.2018.02.014
171 Villiger L. Rothgangl T. Witzigmann D. Oka R. Lin P.J.C. Qi W.H. In vivo cytidine base editing of hepatocytes without detectable off-target mutations in RNA and DNA Nat Biomed Eng 5 2021 179 189 33495639 10.1038/s41551-020-00671-z PMC7610981
172 Brooks D.L. Carrasco M.J. Qu P. Peranteau W.H. Ahrens-Nicklas R.C. Musunuru K. Rapid and definitive treatment of phenylketonuria in variant-humanized mice with corrective editing Nat Commun 14 2023 3451 37301931 10.1038/s41467-023-39246-2 PMC10257655
173 Longhurst H.J. Lindsay K. Petersen R.S. Fijen L.M. Gurugama P. Maag D. CRISPR-Cas9 in vivo gene editing of KLKB1 for hereditary angioedema N Engl J Med 390 2024 432 441 38294975 10.1056/NEJMoa2309149
174 Lian X.Z. Chatterjee S. Sun Y.H. Dilliard S.A. Moore S. Xiao Y.F. Bone-marrow-homing lipid nanoparticles for genome editing in diseased and malignant haematopoietic stem cells Nat Nanotechnol 19 2024 1409 1417 38783058 10.1038/s41565-024-01680-8 PMC11757007
175 Hołubowicz R. Du S.W. Felgner J. Smidak R. Choi E.H. Palczewska G. Safer and efficient base editing and prime editing via ribonucleoproteins delivered through optimized lipid-nanoparticle formulations Nat Biomed Eng 9 2025 57 78 39609561 10.1038/s41551-024-01296-2 PMC11754100
176 Gee P. Lung M.S.Y. Okuzaki Y. Sasakawa N. Iguchi T. Makita Y. Extracellular nanovesicles for packaging of CRISPR-Cas9 protein and sgRNA to induce therapeutic exon skipping Nat Commun 11 2020 1334 32170079 10.1038/s41467-020-14957-y PMC7070030
177 Ling S.K. Yang S.Q. Hu X.D. Yin D. Dai Y. Qian X.Q. Lentiviral delivery of co-packaged Cas9 mRNA and a Vegfa-targeting guide RNA prevents wet age-related macular degeneration in mice Nat Biomed Eng 5 2021 144 156 33398131 10.1038/s41551-020-00656-y
178 Banskota S. Raguram A. Suh S. Du S.W. Davis J.R. Choi E.H. Engineered virus-like particles for efficient in vivo delivery of therapeutic proteins Cell 185 2022 250–65.e16 10.1016/j.cell.2021.12.021 PMC8809250 35021064
179 Mangeot P.E. Risson V. Fusil F. Marnef A. Laurent E. Blin J. Genome editing in primary cells and in vivo using viral-derived Nanoblades loaded with Cas9-sgRNA ribonucleoproteins Nat Commun 10 2019 45 30604748 10.1038/s41467-018-07845-z PMC6318322
180 Pranatharthiharan S. Patel M.D. D’Souza A.A. Devarajan P.V. Inorganic nanovectors for nucleic acid delivery Drug Deliv Transl Res 3 2013 446 470 25788353 10.1007/s13346-012-0116-9
181 Dobrovolskaia M.A. McNeil S.E. Immunological properties of engineered nanomaterials Nat Nanotechnol 2 2007 469 478 18654343 10.1038/nnano.2007.223
182 Luther D.C. Huang R. Jeon T. Zhang X. Lee Y.W. Nagaraj H. Delivery of drugs, proteins, and nucleic acids using inorganic nanoparticles Adv Drug Deliv Rev 156 2020 188 213 32610061 10.1016/j.addr.2020.06.020 PMC8559718
183 Ding Y. Jiang Z.W. Saha K. Kim C.S. Kim S.T. Landis R.F. Gold nanoparticles for nucleic acid delivery Mol Ther 22 2014 1075 1083 24599278 10.1038/mt.2014.30 PMC4048892
184 Miyata K. Oba M. Nakanishi M. Fukushima S. Yamasaki Y. Koyama H. Polyplexes from poly(aspartamide) bearing 1,2-diaminoethane side chains induce pH-selective, endosomal membrane destabilization with amplified transfection and negligible cytotoxicity J Am Chem Soc 130 2008 16287 16294 19006313 10.1021/ja804561g
185 Staahl B.T. Benekareddy M. Coulon-Bainier C. Banfal A.A. Floor S.N. Sabo J.K. Efficient genome editing in the mouse brain by local delivery of engineered Cas9 ribonucleoprotein complexes Nat Biotechnol 35 2017 431 434 28191903 10.1038/nbt.3806 PMC6649674
186 Sharifi M. Attar F. Saboury A.A. Akhtari K. Hooshmand N. Hasan A. Plasmonic gold nanoparticles: optical manipulation, imaging, drug delivery and therapy J Control Release 311–312 2019 170 189 10.1016/j.jconrel.2019.08.032 31472191
187 Connor E.E. Mwamuka J. Gole A. Murphy C.J. Wyatt M.D. Gold nanoparticles are taken up by human cells but do not cause acute cytotoxicity Small 1 2005 325 327 17193451 10.1002/smll.200400093
188 Lasagna-Reeves C. Gonzalez-Romero D. Barria M.A. Olmedo I. Clos A. Ramanujam V.M. Bioaccumulation and toxicity of gold nanoparticles after repeated administration in mice Biochem Biophys Res Commun 393 2010 649 655 20153731 10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.02.046
189 Sonavane G. Tomoda K. Makino K. Biodistribution of colloidal gold nanoparticles after intravenous administration: effect of particle size Colloids Surf, B 66 2008 274 280 10.1016/j.colsurfb.2008.07.004 18722754
190 Murphy C.J. Gole A.M. Stone J.W. Sisco P.N. Alkilany A.M. Goldsmith E.C. Gold nanoparticles in biology: beyond toxicity to cellular imaging Acc Chem Res 41 2008 1721 1730 18712884 10.1021/ar800035u
191 Cho W.S. Cho M. Jeong J. Choi M. Cho H.Y. Han B.S. Acute toxicity and pharmacokinetics of 13 nm-sized PEG-coated gold nanoparticles Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 236 2009 16 24 19162059 10.1016/j.taap.2008.12.023
192 Zhang H.R. Bahamondez-Canas T.F. Zhang Y.J. Leal J. Smyth H.D.C. PEGylated chitosan for nonviral aerosol and mucosal delivery of the CRISPR/Cas9 system in vitro Mol Pharm 15 2018 4814 4826 30222933 10.1021/acs.molpharmaceut.8b00434 PMC6453125
193 Mao S.R. Sun W. Kissel T. Chitosan-based formulations for delivery of DNA and siRNA Adv Drug Deliv Rev 62 2010 12 27 19796660 10.1016/j.addr.2009.08.004
194 Lopez-Andreu J.A. Hidalgo-Santos A.D. Fuentes-Castello M.A. Mancheno-Franch N. Ceron-Perez J.A. Esteban-Ricos M.J. Delayed presentation and prolonged survival of a child with surfactant protein B deficiency J Pediatr 190 2017 268–70.e1 10.1016/j.jpeds.2017.07.009 28888561
195 Tredano M. van Elburg R.M. Kaspers A.G. Zimmermann L.J. Houdayer C. Aymard P. Compound SFTPB 1549C—>GAA (121ins2) and 457delC heterozygosity in severe congenital lung disease and surfactant protein B (SP-B) deficiency Hum Mutat 14 1999 502 509 10571948 10.1002/(SICI)1098-1004(199912)14:6<502::AID-HUMU9>3.0.CO;2-C
196 Qiao J. Sun W.L. Lin S.Y. Jin R. Ma L.X. Liu Y. Cytosolic delivery of CRISPR/Cas9 ribonucleoproteins for genome editing using chitosan-coated red fluorescent protein Chem Commun 55 2019 4707 4710 10.1039/c9cc00010k 30942216
197 Yu M. Wu J. Shi J.J. Farokhzad O.C. Nanotechnology for protein delivery: overview and perspectives J Control Release 240 2016 24 37 26458789 10.1016/j.jconrel.2015.10.012 PMC4833694
198 Mitchell M.J. Billingsley M.M. Haley R.M. Wechsler M.E. Peppas N.A. Langer R. Engineering precision nanoparticles for drug delivery Nat Rev Drug Discov 20 2021 101 124 33277608 10.1038/s41573-020-0090-8 PMC7717100
199 Xie R.S. Wang X.X. Wang Y.Y. Ye M.Z. Zhao Y. Yandell B.S. pH-responsive polymer nanoparticles for efficient delivery of Cas9 ribonucleoprotein with or without donor DNA Adv Mater 34 2022 e2110618 10.1002/adma.202110618 PMC9187620 35119139
200 Kulkarni J.A. Cullis P.R. van der Meel R. Lipid nanoparticles enabling gene therapies: from concepts to clinical utility Nucleic Acid Therapeut 28 2018 146 157 10.1089/nat.2018.0721 29683383
201 Xu C.F. Chen G.J. Luo Y.L. Zhang Y. Zhao G. Lu Z.D. Rational designs of in vivo CRISPR-Cas delivery systems Adv Drug Deliv Rev 168 2021 3 29 31759123 10.1016/j.addr.2019.11.005
202 Kowalski P.S. Rudra A. Miao L. Anderson D.G. Delivering the messenger: advances in technologies for therapeutic mRNA delivery Mol Ther 27 2019 710 728 30846391 10.1016/j.ymthe.2019.02.012 PMC6453548
203 Yi K. Kong H.M. Zheng C.X. Zhuo C.Y. Jin Y.Y. Zhong Q.G. A LIGHTFUL nanomedicine overcomes EGFR-mediated drug resistance for enhanced tyrosine-kinase-inhibitor-based hepatocellular carcinoma therapy Biomaterials 302 2023 122349 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2023.122349 37844429
204 Kong H.M. Zhuo C.Y. Yi K. Zheng C.X. Mintz R.L. Lao Y.H. Hepatocyte-confined CRISPR/Cas9-based nanocleaver precisely eliminates viral DNA for efficient and safe treatment of hepatitis B virus infection Nano Today 53 2023 102040
205 Tenchov R. Bird R. Curtze A.E. Zhou Q. Lipid nanoparticles-from liposomes to mRNA vaccine delivery, a landscape of research diversity and advancement ACS Nano 15 2021 16982 17015 34181394 10.1021/acsnano.1c04996
206 Kazemian P. Yu S.Y. Thomson S.B. Birkenshaw A. Leavitt B.R. Ross C.J.D. Lipid-nanoparticle-based delivery of CRISPR/Cas9 genome-editing components Mol Pharm 19 2022 1669 1686 35594500 10.1021/acs.molpharmaceut.1c00916 PMC9176214
207 Imtiaz A. Maqsood A. Rehman A.U. Morell R.J. Holt J.R. Friedman T.B. Recessive mutations of TMC1 associated with moderate to severe hearing loss Neurogenetics 17 2016 115 123 26879195 10.1007/s10048-016-0477-1 PMC4795972
208 Böttger R. Pauli G. Chao P.H. Al Fayez N. Hohenwarter L. Li S.D. Lipid-based nanoparticle technologies for liver targeting Adv Drug Deliv Rev 154–155 2020 79 101 10.1016/j.addr.2020.06.017 32574575
209 Akinc A. Maier M.A. Manoharan M. Fitzgerald K. Jayaraman M. Barros S. The Onpattro story and the clinical translation of nanomedicines containing nucleic acid-based drugs Nat Nanotechnol 14 2019 1084 1087 31802031 10.1038/s41565-019-0591-y
210 Seidah N.G. Awan Z. Chretien M. Mbikay M. PCSK9: a key modulator of cardiovascular health Circ Res 114 2014 1022 1036 24625727 10.1161/CIRCRESAHA.114.301621
211 Cheng Q. Wei T. Farbiak L. Johnson L.T. Dilliard S.A. Siegwart D.J. Selective organ targeting (SORT) nanoparticles for tissue-specific mRNA delivery and CRISPR-Cas gene editing Nat Nanotechnol 15 2020 313 320 32251383 10.1038/s41565-020-0669-6 PMC7735425
212 Lee Y.J. Jeong M. Park J. Jung H. Lee H. Immunogenicity of lipid nanoparticles and its impact on the efficacy of mRNA vaccines and therapeutics Exp Mol Med 55 2023 2085 2096 37779140 10.1038/s12276-023-01086-x PMC10618257
213 Patone M. Mei X.W. Handunnetthi L. Dixon S. Zaccardi F. Shankar-Hari M. Risks of myocarditis, pericarditis, and cardiac arrhythmias associated with COVID-19 vaccination or SARS-CoV-2 infection Nat Med 28 2022 410 422 34907393 10.1038/s41591-021-01630-0 PMC8863574
214 Mohamed M. Abu Lila A.S. Shimizu T. Alaaeldin E. Hussein A. Sarhan H.A. PEGylated liposomes: immunological responses Sci Technol Adv Mater 20 2019 710 724 31275462 10.1080/14686996.2019.1627174 PMC6598536
215 Hwang T.L. Aljuffali I.A. Lin C.F. Chang Y.T. Fang J.Y. Cationic additives in nanosystems activate cytotoxicity and inflammatory response of human neutrophils: lipid nanoparticles versus polymeric nanoparticles Int J Nanomed 10 2015 371 385 10.2147/IJN.S73017 PMC4294622 25609950
216 Herrmann I.K. Wood M.J.A. Fuhrmann G. Extracellular vesicles as a next-generation drug delivery platform Nat Nanotechnol 16 2021 748 759 34211166 10.1038/s41565-021-00931-2
217 de Jong O.G. Kooijmans S.A.A. Murphy D.E. Jiang L.L. Evers M.J.W. Sluijter J.P.G. Drug delivery with extracellular vesicles: from imagination to innovation Acc Chem Res 52 2019 1761 1770 31181910 10.1021/acs.accounts.9b00109 PMC6639984
218 Wang S.Q. Kong H.M. Zhuo C.Y. Liu L. Lv S.X. Cheng D. Functionalized extracellular nanovesicles as advanced CRISPR delivery systems Biomater Sci 12 2024 3480 3499 38808607 10.1039/d4bm00054d
219 Staring J. Raaben M. Brummelkamp T.R. Viral escape from endosomes and host detection at a glance J Cell Sci 131 2018 jcs216259 10.1242/jcs.216259 30076240
220 Kaczmarczyk S.J. Sitaraman K. Young H.A. Hughes S.H. Chatterjee D.K. Protein delivery using engineered virus-like particles Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 108 2011 16998 17003 21949376 10.1073/pnas.1101874108 PMC3193192
221 Smith S.A. Selby L.I. Johnston A.P.R. Such G.K. The endosomal escape of nanoparticles: toward more efficient cellular delivery Bioconjug Chem 30 2019 263 272 30452233 10.1021/acs.bioconjchem.8b00732
222 Li H.L. Fujimoto N. Sasakawa N. Shirai S. Ohkame T. Sakuma T. Precise correction of the dystrophin gene in Duchenne muscular dystrophy patient induced pluripotent stem cells by TALEN and CRISPR-Cas9 Stem Cell Rep 4 2015 143 154 10.1016/j.stemcr.2014.10.013 PMC4297888 25434822
223 Cideciyan A.V. Leber congenital amaurosis due to RPE65 mutations and its treatment with gene therapy Prog Retin Eye Res 29 2010 398 427 20399883 10.1016/j.preteyeres.2010.04.002 PMC2903652
224 Pankowicz F.P. Barzi M. Legras X. Hubert L. Mi T. Tomolonis J.A. Reprogramming metabolic pathways in vivo with CRISPR/Cas9 genome editing to treat hereditary tyrosinaemia Nat Commun 7 2016 12642 10.1038/ncomms12642 PMC5013601 27572891
225 Tarrés-Freixas F. Aguilar-Gurrieri C. Rodríguez de la Concepción M.L. Urrea V. Trinité B. Ortiz R. An engineered HIV-1 Gag-based VLP displaying high antigen density induces strong antibody-dependent functional immune responses npj Vaccines 8 2023 51 37024469 10.1038/s41541-023-00648-4 PMC10077320
226 Dhawan M. Saied A.A. Sharma M. Virus-like particles (VLPs)-based vaccines against COVID-19: where do we stand amid the ongoing evolution of SARS-CoV-2. Health Sci Rev 9 2023 100127
227 Raguram A. An M. Chen P.Z. Liu D.R. Directed evolution of engineered virus-like particles with improved production and transduction efficiencies Nat Biotechnol 43 2024 1635 1647 39537813 10.1038/s41587-024-02467-x PMC12085157
228 Mirjalili Mohanna S.Z. Djaksigulova D. Hill A.M. Wagner P.K. Simpson E.M. Leavitt B.R. LNP-mediated delivery of CRISPR RNP for wide-spread in vivo genome editing in mouse cornea J Control Release 350 2022 401 413 36029893 10.1016/j.jconrel.2022.08.042
229 Khare P. Edgecomb S.X. Hamadani C.M. Tanner E.E.L. S Manickam D. Lipid nanoparticle-mediated drug delivery to the brain Adv Drug Deliv Rev 197 2023 114861 10.1016/j.addr.2023.114861 37150326
230 Anand P. O’Neil A. Lin E. Douglas T. Holford M. Tailored delivery of analgesic ziconotide across a blood brain barrier model using viral nanocontainers Sci Rep 5 2015 12497 10.1038/srep12497 PMC4522602 26234920
231 Kim J. Eygeris Y. Ryals R.C. Jozić A. Sahay G. Strategies for non-viral vectors targeting organs beyond the liver Nat Nanotechnol 19 2024 428 447 38151642 10.1038/s41565-023-01563-4
232 Liu J. Liu J.H. Mu W.W. Ma Q.P. Zhai X.Y. Jin B. Delivery strategy to enhance the therapeutic efficacy of liver fibrosis via nanoparticle drug delivery systems ACS Nano 18 2024 20861 20885 39082637 10.1021/acsnano.4c02380
233 Harmatz P. Prada C.E. Burton B.K. Lau H. Kessler C.M. Cao L.C. First-in-human in vivo genome editing via AAV-zinc-finger nucleases for mucopolysaccharidosis I/II and hemophilia B Mol Ther 30 2022 3587 3600 36299240 10.1016/j.ymthe.2022.10.010 PMC9734078
234 Nathwani A.C. Tuddenham E.G. Rangarajan S. Rosales C. McIntosh J. Linch D.C. Adenovirus-associated virus vector-mediated gene transfer in hemophilia B N Engl J Med 365 2011 2357 2365 22149959 10.1056/NEJMoa1108046 PMC3265081
235 Lek A. Wong B. Keeler A. Blackwood M. Ma K.Y. Huang S.S. Death after high-dose rAAV9 gene therapy in a patient with Duchenne’s muscular dystrophy N Engl J Med 389 2023 1203 1210 37754285 10.1056/NEJMoa2307798 PMC11288170
236 Tichy E.D. Pillai R. Deng L. Liang L. Tischfield J. Schwemberger S.J. Mouse embryonic stem cells, but not somatic cells, predominantly use homologous recombination to repair double-strand DNA breaks Stem Cell Dev 19 2010 1699 1711 10.1089/scd.2010.0058 PMC3128311 20446816
237 Buechele C. Breese E.H. Schneidawind D. Lin C.H. Jeong J. Duque-Afonso J. MLL leukemia induction by genome editing of human CD34+ hematopoietic cells Blood 126 2015 1683 1694 26311362 10.1182/blood-2015-05-646398 PMC4591792
238 Maddalo D. Manchado E. Concepcion C.P. Bonetti C. Vidigal J.A. Han Y.C. In vivo engineering of oncogenic chromosomal rearrangements with the CRISPR/Cas9 system Nature 516 2014 423 427 25337876 10.1038/nature13902 PMC4270925
239 Deng S.H. Li X.X. Liu S. Chen J.F. Li M.Q. Chew S.Y. Codelivery of CRISPR-Cas9 and chlorin e6 for spatially controlled tumor-specific gene editing with synergistic drug effects Sci Adv 6 2020 eabb4005 10.1126/sciadv.abb4005 PMC7439618 32832641
240 Lyu P. Wang L.X. Lu B.S. Virus-like particle mediated CRISPR/Cas9 delivery for efficient and safe genome editing Life 10 2020 366 33371215 10.3390/life10120366 PMC7766694
241 Rabinowitz R. Offen D. Single-base resolution: increasing the specificity of the CRISPR-Cas system in gene editing Mol Ther 29 2021 937 948 33248248 10.1016/j.ymthe.2020.11.009 PMC7938333
242 Li T.X. Yang Y.Y. Qi H.Z. Cui W.G. Zhang L. Fu X.X. CRISPR/Cas9 therapeutics: progress and prospects Signal Transduct Targeted Ther 8 2023 36 10.1038/s41392-023-01309-7 PMC9841506 36646687
243 Durrant M.G. Perry N.T. Pai J.J. Jangid A.R. Athukoralage J.S. Hiraizumi M. Bridge RNAs direct programmable recombination of target and donor DNA Nature 630 2024 984 993 38926615 10.1038/s41586-024-07552-4 PMC11208160
244 Doudna J.A. The promise and challenge of therapeutic genome editing Nature 578 2020 229 236 32051598 10.1038/s41586-020-1978-5 PMC8992613
245 Xu X.J. Tang H.L. Guo J.J. Xin H.H. Ping Y. A dual-specific CRISPR-Cas nanosystem for precision therapeutic editing of liver disorders Signal Transduct Targeted Ther 7 2022 269 10.1038/s41392-022-01071-2 PMC9372082 35953473
246 Chen X.H. Chen Y.X. Xin H.H. Wan T. Ping Y. Near-infrared optogenetic engineering of photothermal nanoCRISPR for programmable genome editing Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 117 2020 2395 2405 31941712 10.1073/pnas.1912220117 PMC7007568
247 Zhuo C.Y. Zhang J.B. Lee J.H. Jiao J. Cheng D. Liu L. Spatiotemporal control of CRISPR/Cas9 gene editing Signal Transduct Targeted Ther 6 2021 238 10.1038/s41392-021-00645-w PMC8214627 34148061
248 Cai W.Q. Luo T.L. Mao L.Q. Wang M. Spatiotemporal delivery of CRISPR/Cas9 genome editing machinery using stimuli-responsive vehicles Angew Chem Int Ed 60 2021 8596 8606 10.1002/anie.202005644 32385892
249 Leandro K. Rufino-Ramos D. Breyne K. Di Ianni E. Lopes S.M. Nobre R.J. Exploring the potential of cell-derived vesicles for transient delivery of gene editing payloads Adv Drug Deliv Rev 211 2024 115346 10.1016/j.addr.2024.115346 PMC11366383 38849005
250 Lu S.C. Cai Y.J. Bacterial molecular syringe for drug delivery Cell Host Microbe 31 2023 917 919 37321174 10.1016/j.chom.2023.05.005
251 Kreitz J. Friedrich M.J. Guru A. Lash B. Saito M. Macrae R.K. Programmable protein delivery with a bacterial contractile injection system Nature 616 2023 357 364 36991127 10.1038/s41586-023-05870-7 PMC10097599
