
JOURNAL INFORMATION
==============================
NLM Title Abbreviation: Cell Chem Biol
Journal ID: Cell Chem Biol

Cell chemical biology

ISSN: 2451-9456
EISSN: 2451-9448

ARTICLE INFORMATION
==============================
PMCID: PMC12145181
Article ID: NIHMS2079427
PMID: 40334660
DOI: 10.1016/j.chembiol.2025.04.005
Article ID: NIHMS2079427
Article ID: NIHPA2079427
Article version: 1
Subjects: Article

Microbiota Mechanisms in Cancer Progression and Therapy

Zhang Xing 1
Fam Kyong Tkhe 1
Dai Tingting 1
Hang Howard C. 1 2 *
1 Department of Immunology and Microbiology, Scripps Research, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA
2 Department of Chemistry, Scripps Research, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA
Author contributions

XZ and HCH wrote and revised the manuscript and generated figures. KTF and TD provided input on the manuscript and generated figures.

* Correspondence: hhang@scripps.edu
Print publication date: 2025 May 15
Electronic publication date: 2025 May 6
Volume: 32
Issue: 5
First page: 653
Last page: 677
Author manuscript; available in PMC: 2026 May 15

This file is available for text mining. It may also be used consistent with the principles of fair use under the copyright law.

==============================
Summary

The composition of the microbiota in patients has been shown to correlate with cancer progression and response to therapy, highlighting unique opportunities to improve patient outcomes. In this review, we discuss the challenges and advancements in understanding the chemical mechanisms of specific microbiota species, pathways, and molecules involved in cancer progression and treatment. We also describe the modulation of cancer and immunotherapy by the microbiota, along with approaches for investigating microbiota enzymes and metabolites. Elucidating these specific microbiota mechanisms and molecules should offer new opportunities for developing enhanced diagnostics and therapeutics to improve outcomes for cancer patients. Nonetheless, many microbiota mechanisms remain to be determined and require innovative chemical genetic approaches.

Graphical Abstract

eTOC blurb

Zhang et al. highlight the influence of specific microbiota species, molecules, and mechanisms on cancer progression and response to immunotherapy. They present examples of these mechanisms and discuss their implications for developing next-generation microbiota-based biomarkers, interventions, and therapeutics to improve cancer patient outcomes.

Introduction.

The observation that microbes can influence cancer progression and treatment dates back to the pioneering and controversial studies of William Coley, who discovered tumor-associated bacteria in patients with better outcomes and hypothesized these microbes could influence cancer progression at turn of the 20th Century1. This led to the subsequent development of Coley’s toxins, composed of heat-killed Gram-positive Streptococcus pyogenes and Gram-negative Serratia marcescens, which were injected into cancer patients and led to tumor regression in some cases, but had variable efficacy and lethal adverse effects at times1. While this led to criticism of Coley’s work from the medical community and limited the use of Coley’s toxins, these studies marked one of the earliest attempts to harness microbes and immune responses for cancer therapy1. After Coley’s studies, it was noted that patients with active tuberculosis or that were vaccinated with Bacillus Calmette–Guérin (BCG), an attenuated strain of Mycobacterium bovis, exhibited lower incidence of cancer2. Landmark studies by Lloyd Old at the Sloan-Kettering Institute in 1959 then showed that mice infected with BCG showed increased resistance to transplanted tumors3. BCG was then explored as a therapy for a variety of cancer types, but eventually only demonstrated to be effective against bladder cancer by Alvaro Morales in the early 1970s and still used today for treatment of non-muscle-invasive bladder cancer2. These early studies showcase how bacterial modulation of host immunity can be developed as an immunotherapy for cancer. With the advances in the study of microbiota (species) and microbiome (genes) over the past two decades, the re-discovery of cancer-associated microbiota has inspired the inclusion of the microbiota as a new dimension in hallmarks of cancer4,5 and a renaissance in leveraging microbes to fight cancer6–10.

The human microbiota, which consists of trillions of microorganisms - including bacteria, viruses, fungi, and other microbes—plays a crucial role in health and disease11–13. Notably, the abundance and diversity of microbiota species provide individuals with significant additional genetic and biochemical functions that are not encoded by the host genome. Advances in high-throughput sequencing technologies (16S ribosomal RNA gene sequencing and metagenomics)14 and metabolomics15 have revealed not only distinct microbiota species, pathways and molecules across different tissues but also changes between healthy and disease states. However, demonstrating causation of specific microbiota species, pathways and molecules for specific phenotypes, cancer progression or response to therapy, is still challenging for many reasons: i) the microbiota comprises many different microbial species which are highly variable and dynamic between tissues and individuals, ii) the phenotype of interest may be driven by low abundance and strain-specific microbiota species, iii) reconstitution of specific microbial species/strains may require unique conditions and depend upon inter-kingdom interactions and iv) specific genetic methods and pharmacological tools are not readily available for manipulating most microbiota species16,17. Nonetheless, significant progress has been made towards characterizing cancer-associated microbiota species and determining their impact on cancer progression18–20 and different therapies6–10.

In this review, we highlight the chemical mechanisms of specific microbiota species in cancer progression and immunotherapy (Fig. 1), which can be classified into these general categories: i) production of toxins that directly promote cancer cell proliferation, ii) expression/secretion of virulence or adhesion factors that modulate antitumor immunity, iii) direct modulation of cancer therapeutics, iv) production of microbe-associated molecular patterns (MAMPs) that stimulate immune pattern recognition receptors (PRRs) and inflammatory pathways that can synergize with immunotherapies, v) generation of secondary metabolites that modulate host metabolism and/or cell signaling that can synergize with immunotherapies and vi) expression of cross-reactive antigens that drive adaptive antitumor immune responses (Fig. 1). We provide examples of these mechanisms below and discuss their implications for the development of next-generation microbiota-based biomarkers, interventions and therapeutics for cancer treatment.

Microbiota mechanisms in cancer progression.

The evidence that microbes can promote cancer is well established with the discovery and characterization of “oncoviruses” such as human papillomaviruses (HPVs), Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), hepatitis B virus (HBV), hepatitis C virus (HCV), Kaposi sarcoma–associated herpes virus (KSHV) and others21. In contrast, other oncomicrobes (bacteria, fungi) are only beginning to emerge9,18–20. Historically, the most notable bacterial species that has been shown to cause cancer is Helicobacter pylori in gastric cancer22. H. pylori infection of gastric epithelial cells damages the mucosal barrier, allows urea translocation, induces chronic inflammation which alters gastric physiology to cause acid hypersecretion and peptic ulcers, leading to gastritis and the initiation of gastric adenocarcinomas (Fig. 2A)23. In addition to H. pylori, Streptococcus anginosus was found to reside in the gastric mucosa and promote gastric tumorigenesis24. Of note, the surface protein of S. anginosus TMPC was shown to bind the Annexin A2 receptor (ANXA2) on gastric epithelial cells and promote bacterial attachment, invasion and activation of oncogenic MAPK signaling (Fig. 2B)24. Other bacterial pathogens have also been shown to trigger different gastrointestinal cancers, such as Salmonella typhi in gallbladder cancer (Fig. 2C)25, enterotoxigenic Bacteroides fragilis (ETBF) (Fig. 2D)26, Clostridioides difficile (Fig. 2D)27 and polyketide synthase (pks)+ E. coli28–30 (Fig. 2E) in colorectal cancer (CRC). To drive tumorigenesis, these “oncobacteria” secrete virulence factors H. pylori CagA (Fig. 2A)31, S. anginosus TMPC (Fig. 2B)24, S. typhi AvrA (Fig. 2C)32, S. typhi typhoid toxin (Fig. 2C)33, B. fragilis toxin (Fig. 2D)26, C. difficile TcdB34 (Fig. 2D) or genotoxins pks+ E. coli colibactin28–30 (Fig. 2E) that damage the epithelial barrier and promote inflammation. Notably, the discovery and characterization of colibactin as a DNA alkylater, crosslinker and double strain break inducer28–30 has facilitated the identification of other potential oncobacteria species/strains (Klebsiella pneumoniae, Enterobacter aerogenes, and Citrobacter koseri) based on the expression of the colibactin (clb) gene cluster35. The exploration of other microbiota species (Morganella morganii) has also revealed different metabolites such as indolimines that are capable of inducing DNA double strain breaks36. These studies suggest that harboring proinflammatory virulence factors and toxins are key features of oncobacteria.

Beyond proinflammatory virulence factors and toxins, oncobacteria may encode other mechanisms which promote tumorigenesis. For example, Fusobacterium nucleatum is a gram-negative anaerobe that is prevalent in the oral microbiota of healthy individuals, but is enriched in the fecal microbiota of CRC patients37. Notably, F. nucleatum does not express any known proinflammatory virulence factors or toxins, but is sufficient to promote tumorigenesis in animal models37. Subsequent mechanistic studies have revealed that F. nucleatum expresses adhesins/lectins such as Fap2, which facilitates its interaction with D-galactose-β(1–3)-N-acetyl-D-galactosamine (Gal-GalNAc) on host cells (Fig. 2F)38. In addition, a genome-wide screen in F. nucleatum revealed RadD as an adhesin that facilitates the attachment of F. nucleatum to CRC cells ex vivo (Fig. 2F)39. F. nucleatum RadD binds directly to CD147, a receptor overexpressed on CRC cell surfaces, which triggers the PI3K-AKT-NF-κB signaling cascade to promote tumorigenesis in vivo. The analysis of CRC patient samples also showed that elevated radD gene levels are positively correlated with activated oncogenic signaling and poor patient outcomes. Interestingly, genetic deletion of radD or CD147 antibody blockade impaired F. nucleatum attachment and tumorigenesis in vivo, suggesting the RadD-CD147 interaction could be a potential therapeutic target for CRC39. F. nucleatum adhesion to CRC cells has also been suggested to trigger proinflammatory responses and promote tumor progression in the colon40 by formate production, activation of aryl-hydrocarbon (AHR) receptor signaling, and enhancement of cancer stemness (Fig. 2F)41.

In addition to F. nucleatum, microbiota analysis revealed Peptostreptococcus anaerobius, a gram-positive non-spore forming anaerobic bacteria, was also enriched in CRC patients42. Functional studies showed P. anaerobius adheres to colonic tumor cells and promotes colorectal carcinogenesis in mouse models42. The analysis of P. anaerobius adherence factors identified a bacterial surface protein and putative cell wall binding repeat 2 (PCWBR2) that directly interacts with α2/β1 integrin expressed on human CRC tumors and cell lines (Fig. 2G)42. The interaction between PCWBR2 and integrin α2/β1 induces the activation of the PI3K–Akt pathway in CRC cells, which results in the increased cell proliferation and activation of NF-κB activation. In the CRC ApcMin/+ mouse model, P. anaerobius administration resulted in the expansion of myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs), tumor-associated macrophages and granulocytic tumor-associated neutrophils, which are associated with chronic inflammation and tumor progression42. Pharmacological or genetic interference with α2/β1 function impaired P. anaerobius adherence and abrogated oncogenic responses in vitro and in vivo, which highlights the PCWBR2-integrin α2/β1 interaction as a potential therapeutic target for CRC42.

Translocation of oncobacteria species from the gut to other tissues can also impact host immunity and cancer progression. For example, translocation of Enterococcus species from the gut to the liver has been shown to promote autoimmunity in the case of E. gallinarum43 and exacerbate alcoholic hepatitis with E. faecalis44. Moreover, the translocation of cytolysin (gelE)-producing strains of E. faecalis into the liver has been shown to promote liver carcinogenesis45. Similarly, a gram-negative bacterium, K. pneumoniae, was found to be enriched in tumor tissues of patients with hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC)46. In mouse models, monocolonization with K. pneumoniae was shown to compromise the gut barrier and translocate to the liver46. K. pneumoniae translocation promotes HCC development through the interaction of its surface protein PBP1B with TLR4 (Fig. 2H)46. In prostate cancer, intestinal microbiota species (Ruminococcus sp.) capable of metabolizing androgen precursors into active androgens were shown to promote endocrine resistance and castration-resistant prostate cancer47. Tissue-resident and/or intratumoral microbiota species have also been suggested to modulate cancer progression. For example, lung-resident microbiota has been suggested to activate γδ T cells and promote lung adenocarcinoma48. In breast cancer, intratumoral microbiota species has been reported promote metastasis by reorganizing actin cytoskeleton in circulating tumor cells (CTCs) and enhancing resistance to mechanical stress49.

Microbiota metabolites can also directly impact cancer progression. Bile acids (BAs) in particular have been shown to modulate cancer progression. BAs are synthesized in the liver from cholesterol and conjugated with amino acids by the BA-conjugating enzyme bile acid–CoA:amino acid N-acyltransferase (BAAT). These primary conjugated BAs are then converted into secondary BAs by gut microbiota and impact the function of cancer as well as immune cells. For example, Clostridium scindens metabolism of primary bile acids (BAs) into their secondary derivatives have been reported to inhibit natural killer T (NKT) cells and promote liver metastasis50. In liver cancer, conjugated BAs were found to be elevated in human hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and inhibition of conjugated BA synthesis through BAAT deletion in mouse models showed enhanced tumor-specific T cell responses, reduced tumor growth and improved response to immunotherapy51. Interestingly, unconjugated BAs exhibited different effects, as primary BAs induced oxidative stress, whereas the secondary BA lithocholic acid (LCA) inhibited T cell function through endoplasmic reticulum stress. In contrast, ursodeoxycholic acid (UDCA) was found to promote tumor-specific T cell responses and was sufficient to reduce tumor burden by dietary supplementation in mice51. In CRC, deoxycholic acid (DCA) and tauro-β-muricholic acid (T-βMCA) have been shown to promote the proliferation of Lgr5+ intestinal cancer stem cells by antagonizing the intestinal farnesoid X receptor (FXR)52. Furthermore, microbiota generation of secondary BAs such as DCA has been shown to suppress CD8+ T cell responses by targeting plasma membrane Ca2+ ATPase and inhibiting calcium dependent nuclear factor of activated T cells (NFAT) signaling, which promoted CRC progression in mice and correlated with DCA-producing microbiota in CRC patients53. Subsequent paired microbiome and metabolome analyses showed that high-fat diet (HFD) increased the levels of non-classical amino acid-conjugated BAs, which can be synthesized by microbiota species such as Ileibacterium valens and Ruminococcus gnavus and impact intestinal cancer stem cell growth54. In addition, bile salt hydrolase (BSH)-expressing Bacteroides were enriched in fecal microbiota of overweight CRC patients and HFD-induced CRC mice55. Notably, overexpression of the bsh gene from B. fragilis NCTC9343 strain in B. fragilis 638R, a strain with low BSH activity, resulted in increased unconjugated BAs in the colon and accelerated HFD-induced CRC progression55. The increased levels of DCA and LCA activated β-catenin/CCL28 signaling and increased the number of intra-tumoral immunosuppressive CD25+Foxp3+ Treg cells55. Inhibition of β-catenin/CCL28 signaling or BSH activity attenuated the HFD-induced CRC progression, which highlights these pathways as potential targets for CRC prevention and treatment55. These studies suggest that specific BAs promote cancer progression and can be regulated by BSH-expressing microbiota species as well as dietary factors54,55. In addition to BAs, microbiota activation of PRRs such as nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain-containing protein 1 (NOD1), which senses D-glutamyl-meso-diaminopimelic acid (iE-DAP) fragments of bacterial peptidoglycan, in myeloid cells has been reported to expand MDSCs and promote CRC56. These studies showcase how microbiota metabolites can also directly interact with cancer and immune cells to promote tumorigenesis.

In addition to oncobacteria and their metabolites57,58, analysis of the intratumoral microbiome revealed an enrichment of different fungal species in cancers59–61. Amongst pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC)-associated mycobiota, the skin prevalent fungal species Malassezia was shown to promote pancreatic oncogenesis and was suggested to function through the production of fungal glycans that engage host mannose-binding lectin (MBL) and the complement cascade59. Furthermore, the intratumoral mycobiome was shown to enhance cancer cell release of IL-33 and promote PDAC progression61. Alternatively, analysis of the mycobiome in gastrointestinal cancers showed an enrichment of Candida and Saccharomyces species that were correlated with decreased survival among stomach cancer patients62. Tumor-resident fungi have also been associated with immunosuppression, poor patient outcomes and found to promote lung cancer progression63. Of note, Aspergillus sydowii was shown to promote lung tumor progression via IL-1β-mediated expansion and activation of MDSCs, resulting in suppression of cytotoxic T lymphocyte cells63. Furthermore, A. sydowii stimulation of IL-1β-secretion was suggested to function through fungal β-glucan binding and activation of the Dectin-1/CARD9 pathway63. Collectively, these studies highlight how intratumoral oncomicrobiota species and metabolites can directly modulate cancer cell proliferation and/or host immunity to promote tumorigenesis.

Microbiota mechanisms in cancer suppression.

A variety of microbiota species and metabolites have also been reported to suppress tumorigenesis9. For example, short chain-fatty acids (SCFAs) such as acetate, propionate, butyrate, pentanoate, and valproate are abundant microbiota metabolites that are generated by metabolism and fermentation of dietary fiber and have complex roles in cancer suppression64. In the gut, microbiota generation of SCFAs impart anti-inflammatory effects on myeloid cells and colonic regulatory T cells through the inhibition of histone deacetylases and activation of GPCRs (GPR109a, GPR43, GPR41 and others), respectively65. For example, SCFA-producing microbiota consortia have been suggested to activate GPR109a in colonic myeloid cells, induce the differentiation of regulatory T cells and suppress the development of CRC (Fig. 3A)66. Other microbiota species have also been shown to suppress tumorigenesis. L. reuteri generation of 3-hydroxypropionaldehyde (reuterin) was shown to alter redox balance, inhibit protein translation and reduce the proliferation and survival of colon cancer cells (Fig. 3B)67. In addition, Clostridiales species that were associated with low tumor burden in CRC patients and mouse models were sufficient to suppress CRC in mouse models68. The activity of the Clostridiales consortia and specific species such as Roseburia intestinalis or Anaerostipes caccae were correlated with intratumoral infiltration and activation of CD8+ T cells was more effective than anti-PD-1 therapy (see below)68, although no specific bacteria factor(s) or signaling pathway were described.

Microbiota species can also modulate cancer progression in a sex-dependent manner. Notably, Carnobacterium maltaromaticum was found to be specifically depleted in female CRC patients and was sufficient to suppress CRC progression a female-specific manner in two different mouse models. Mechanistically, estrogen was found to increase the colonic expression of SLC3A2 and mediate the attachment and colonization of C. maltaromaticum through its D-alanine-D-alanine carboxypeptidase (DD-CPase). Metabolomic and transcriptomic profiling revealed C. maltaromaticum co-metabolism of 7-dehydrocholesterol (7-DHC) with other microbiota species generated vitamin D, which activated vitamin D receptor (VDR) signaling to suppress CRC (Fig. 3C)69. The estrogen upregulation of expression of SLC3A2 and its interaction with C. maltaromaticum provides an important explanation for sex-dependent microbiota suppression of CRC. In PDAC, patients with longer-term survival showed more immune activation and higher tumor microbial diversity, with an enrichment in intratumoral microbiome signature (Pseudoxanthomonas-Streptomyces-Saccharopolyspora-Bacillus clausii) that showed enhanced inhibition of tumor growth in mouse models with fecal microbiota transplantation58. These studies highlight differential roles of microbiota metabolites on cancer progression that may depend upon microbiota species and metabolite distribution in vivo (gut versus tumor), cancer type and diet. Collectively, these studies highlight how nucleic acid sequencing methods have revealed tumor-associated microbiota species (bacteria and fungi) and motivated functional studies to demonstrate causation in animal models. However, the prevalence and significance of other oncomicrobiota species in human cancers is still controversial and will require more rigorous bioinformatic analyses70–74 as well as additional functional studies.

Microbiota modulation of carcinogens and cancer chemotherapeutics.

With the increased appreciation of microbiota metabolism and modulation of xenobiotics75–78, recent studies have begun to reveal important impacts of specific microbiota on carcinogens, chemotherapy and radiotherapy. For example, antibiotic depletion of the gut microbiota reduced the metabolism of carcinogens such as nitrosamines and attenuated the severity of nitrosamine-induced urinary bladder cancer in mice79. Of note, specific Escherichia species such as E. flexneri were identified from human fecal samples and validated in mouse models as key microbiota species involved in nitrosamine metabolism (Fig. 4A)79. In chemotherapy, the selective pharmacological inhibition of microbiota-encoded β-glucuronidases can mitigate the side effects of the cancer chemotherapeutic irinotecan (Fig. 4B)80. Alternatively, intratumoral bacteria have been shown to induce resistance to gemcitabine-based chemotherapy by metabolizing the drug into an inactive form (Fig. 4C)81. These studies show how specific microbiota species and metabolism can directly impact the activity of carcinogens and chemotherapy in human cancers.

The microbiota can also indirectly impact the efficacy of chemotherapy and radiotherapy by modulating the host mucosal barriers and immune responses. For example, cyclophosphamide (CTX), a prominent alkylating anticancer agent, has been found to disrupt the intestinal barrier and induce microbial dysbiosis and bacterial translocation into secondary lymphoid organs82. The translocation of bacteria induced pathogenic T helper 17 cells and memory TH1 immune responses that promoted the antitumor activity of CTX82. The microbiota modulation of CTX anticancer activity was further linked to specific microbiota species such as Enterococcus hirae, which translocated from the small intestine to secondary lymphoid organs and increased the intratumoral cytotoxic CD8+ T cells83. Alternatively, Barnesiella intestinihominis accumulation in the colon promoted the infiltration of IFN-γ-producing γδ T cells into cancer lesions. Notably, the presence of E. hirae and B. intestinihominis specific-memory TH1 cell immune responses were correlated with longer progression-free survival in advanced lung and ovarian cancer patients treated with CTX83. In addition, microbiota depletion was shown to impair the antitumor activity of CpG-oligonucleotide immunotherapy and platinum chemotherapy by decreasing the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines, reactive oxygen species and cytotoxicity after chemotherapy84. Alternatively, F. nucleatum was shown to promote chemoresistance to oxaliplatin and 5-FU therapy in CRC by TLR activation and upregulation of autophagy85. In cervical cancer, Lactobacillus iners in the gut microbiome was associated with poor tumor response to chemoradiation86. Functional studies suggest L. iners production of L-lactate rewires tumor metabolism, which confers resistance to chemotherapy and radiation for other cancer types as well86.

Interestingly, fungal and bacterial components of the microbiota have been shown to have opposing effects on radiation therapy in mouse models of breast cancer and melanoma87. Antifungal depletion of the mycobiota enhanced responsiveness to radiation, whereas antibiotic depletion of bacteria induced overgrowth of fungi and reduced radiation efficacy87. Expression of Dectin-1, a fungal β-glucan receptor, was negatively associated with breast cancer patient survival and was required for the fungal suppression of radiation therapy in mouse models87. Alternatively, microbiota metabolism of dietary nutrients can also impact the efficacy of the chemotherapy. For example, the conversion of tryptophan (Trp) into indole-3-acetic acid (3-IAA) upregulated the production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and downregulated autophagy, which reduced the proliferation of tumor cells and improved PDAC response to irinotecan and oxaliplatin combination chemotherapy88. These studies highlight how microbiota modulation of host tissue barriers, immunity and metabolism can indirectly impact the efficacy of chemotherapy and radiation therapy.

Microbiota modulation of cancer immunotherapy.

The discovery of immune checkpoint receptors such as cytotoxic T lymphocyte-associated protein 4 (CTLA-4) and programmed death 1 (PD-1) as well as their corresponding ligands and programmed death ligands (PD-L1 and PD-L2), respectively, has been instrumental for understanding the regulation of adaptive immune responses and inspired new approaches for cancer immunotherapy89,90. Notably, the development of inhibitory antibodies for these immune checkpoint proteins has resulted in immune checkpoint blockade (ICB) therapy, which reinvigorates T cells and unleashes their activity to kill tumor cells91. Moreover, chimeric antigen receptor T-cell (CAR-T) therapy, which also leverages the cytolytic activity of T cells, has been developed to kill tumor cells92. These two transformative approaches have motivated the development of remarkable immunotherapies that have significantly prolonged the survival of many cancer patients91,92. However, CAR-T and ICB therapies are not completely effective in all cancer patients, as several cancer types (pancreatic cancer, glioblastoma, colon cancer, and prostate cancer) remain refractory to existing cancer immunotherapies93. The mechanisms that limit the efficacy of currently available CAR-T and ICB therapies are complex90,92, but these limitations have inspired the development of combination therapies91 and engineered antibodies as well as discovery of other immune checkpoint targets (TIM3, TIGIT, LAG3)94, including receptors and ligands on myeloid cells such as signal-regulatory protein α (SIRPα)95.

Beyond immune checkpoints, the presence and composition of microbiota are now appreciated as an important factor for the efficacy of cancer immunotherapy7. For example, the antitumor activity of CTLA-4 blockade was abolished when the microbiota was depleted using antibiotic treatment or in germ-free mice96. Moreover, the antitumor activity of PD-L1-specific antibody therapy varies between isogenic mouse strains with different microbiota composition97. In humans, three landmark studies demonstrated that ICB-responsive and non-responsive cancer patients have distinct microbiota composition and transplantation of patient fecal microbiota or specific microbiota species into mouse models recapitulated ICB responses98–100. While fecal microbiota transplantation (FMT) has only been approved to clinically to treat recurrent Clostridioides difficile infection101,102, these recent developments in cancer immunotherapy have motivated FMT studies in humans. In small cohort clinical trials, FMT from ICB responders altered the microbiota of the recipients and reprogrammed their tumor microenvironment to overcome resistance to anti-PD-1 immunotherapy in melanoma patients103,104. Furthermore, FMT from healthy donors can abrogate ICB-associated colitis to mitigate immune-related adverse events (irAEs)105,106. In addition to T cell directed ICBs, the microbiota also impacts the antitumor activity of CD47 blockade directed at myeloid cells107. Beyond patient microbiota, the selection of microbiota consortia from healthy human donors that induce CD8 T cell activation also enhanced ICB antitumor activity in mouse models108. Furthermore, the microbiota composition of cancer patients is also correlated with their response to CAR-T therapy109–112. These studies demonstrate the significance of microbiota composition on the efficacy of cancer immunotherapies and highlight potential clinical benefits of combination therapy with FMT, however the specific causal microbiota species and their mechanisms are still unclear.

The bacterial 16S rRNA gene sequencing and metagenomic analysis of the fecal microbiota samples from immunotherapy-responsive and non-responsive cancer patients have provided specific microbiota species and metabolites that are correlated with efficacy of ICB96–100,103,104,113 and CAR-T109–112 therapies. While the initial survey of ICB-promoting microbiota based on bacterial 16S rRNA gene sequencing suggested enrichment of specific bacterial species (Akkermansia muciniphila98,114, Bifidobacterium longum99 and others)115,116, subsequent shotgun metagenomic sequencing of more ICB-naive patients and comparative analysis of other published studies revealed limited reproducibility of microbiome-based signatures across different cohorts, demonstrating that microbiota-dependent ICB responses are highly variable and complex117,118. Moreover, the longitudinal studies have shown that the microbiota composition of patients varies prior, during and after to ICB treatment as well as with the type of ICB and co-medications, all of which may influence treatment efficacy as well as irAEs118,119. To address these challenges, a custom scoring approach based on gut microbiota ecological topology was developed to profile and predict cancer patient immunotherapy outcomes120. Using metagenomic analysis of more patient fecal microbiota samples (245 non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients), a co-abundance network of microbiota sub-consortia was developed and integrated with ICB-active species such as Akkermansia muciniphila120. This custom scoring approach yielded a topological score and quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) test of 21 microbiota species that can estimate the likelihood of an individual to respond to PD1/PD-L1 blockade in NSCLC and other cancer (melanoma and colorectal) patients120. These studies highlight how the integration of metagenomic analysis with specific ICB-active microbiota species in fecal microbiota samples may provide predictive microbiome-based biomarkers for cancer patient responses to immunotherapy. The discovery of ICB-active microbiota species and the elucidation of their mechanisms of action will therefore be crucial to expanding the predictive powerful of metagenomics and translational of specific microbiota consortia, species and/or molecules to improve cancer immunotherapy. Below, we summarize the activity of specific microbiota species (by genus) that are sufficient to promote ICB antitumor activity in vivo and highlight progress towards their mechanisms of action in cancer immunotherapy.

Akkermansia spp.

A. muciniphila is a gram-negative anaerobic bacterium that was initially discovered from a mucus degradation screen121 and is now appreciated as a highly active gut microbiota species in animal models and humans122. Although A. muciniphila is not an abundant microbiota species (1–3%) by 16S rRNA gene sequencing, it is by far the dominant Akkermansia species with over 98% identity 16S rRNA gene sequences in human microbiomes. A. muciniphila was first correlated with human health from the microbiota analysis of lean versus obese individuals123 and then shown to reverse high-fat diet-induced metabolic disorders, adipose tissue inflammation and insulin resistance in mouse models124. Subsequent studies then showed caloric restriction increases the abundance of A. muciniphila in the human and animal gut125, which was also observed for the type 2 diabetes drug metformin126. While there is a beneficial correlation for A. muciniphila in metabolic diseases122 and inflammatory bowel diseases127, the enrichment of A. muciniphila in microbiomes has also been correlated with adverse outcomes in neurodegenerative disorders122. A. muciniphila was identified in microbiota of ICB-responsive cancer patients and shown to promote ICB antitumor activity in mouse models98,114,120 as well as induce intestinal adaptive immune responses during homeostasis128.

The precise A. muciniphila mechanism(s) of action in vivo is still unclear. In the gut, extracellular vesicles (EVs) from the original mucin-degrading A. muciniphila MucT strain can confer protection against dextran sulfate sodium (DSS)-induced colitis in mice129,130. Interestingly, a purified outer membrane protein from A. muciniphila, Amuc_1100, was suggested to interact with Toll-like receptor 2 (TLR-2) (Fig. 5A) and improve metabolism131 as well as reduce colitis-associated tumorigenesis by modulation of CD8+ T cells132. These studies and clinical associations of A. muciniphila with metabolic disorders has motivated the exploration of live or pasteurized A. muciniphila as a therapeutic for obesity and associated disorders in humans131. In addition to Amuc_1100, the biochemical fractionation and screening of immunogenic A. muciniphila molecules has revealed unique phospholipids with branched acyl chains (a15:0-i15:0 PE) that stimulate TLR1-TLR2 heterodimer signaling (Fig. 5A)133. Notably, activation of TLRs has been shown to stimulate pro-inflammatory immune responses against cancer134 and synthetic small molecule TLR agonists are actively being investigated as anticancer therapeutics135.

A. muciniphila has also been reported to produce cyclic dinucleotides (CDNs) such as di-adenosine monophosphate (c-di-AMP) that can activate stimulator of interferon genes (STING) and trigger innate and adaptive immune responses in tumor microenvironments (TMEs) (Fig. 5A)136. In particular, CDN-induced stimulation of STING and subsequent activation of type I interferons (IFN-I) and other pro-inflammatory cytokines91,92 has been shown to promote myeloid cell (monocytes, macrophages) and natural killer (NK) cell antitumor activity and enhance the efficacy of ICB137. In addition to natural ligands, synthetic mimetics of CDNs that exhibit potent STING activation and antitumor activity have been developed138. These studies highlight specific molecules and host pathways that may be triggered by A. muciniphila, but isogenic mutant bacteria strains have not been generated and validated to demonstrate that the associated biosynthetic pathways and molecules are required for A. muciniphila function in vivo. However, the development of improved genetic methods in A. muciniphila139 should afford new opportunities to functionally validate these pathways in cancer immunotherapy and discover other factors that are important for the health and therapy-associated phenotypes of this prominent microbiota species.

Bacteroides spp.

Bacteroides species are gram-negative, rod shaped obligate anaerobic bacteria that are amongst the most abundant microbiota species in the human gastrointestinal tract and constitutes ~25% of microbiota species in the colon140. B. vulgatus, B. distasonis, B. thetaiotaomicron, B. fragilis, B. ovatus, B. eggerthii and B. unijormis are the most prominent species in mammalian fecal microbiota. B. thetaiotaomicron is well-recognized as a key microbiota species that is responsible for the metabolism of dietary polysaccharides. In ICB therapy, the administration of CTLA-4 blockade induced the outgrowth of B. thetaiotaomicron and B. fragilis and T cell responses specific for B. thetaiotaomicron or B. fragilis were associated with the efficacy of CTLA-4 blockade in mice and patients96. Antibiotic-treated or germ-free mice did not respond to CTLA blockade, but antitumor activity was restored by gavage with B. fragilis, by immunization with B. fragilis polysaccharides, or by adoptive transfer of B. fragilis–specific T cells96. B. fragilis polysaccharide A (PSA) has been suggested to signal through TLR2 and induce Foxp3+ regulatory T cells to promote immunologic tolerance141–143. Interestingly, vitamin D levels have been correlated with improved ICB-responsiveness in cancer patients and shown to promote the outgrowth of B. fragilis144. In mice, vitamin D did not appear to act directly on B. fragilis and was proposed to signal through intestinal epithelial cells to alter the microbiota composition in favor of B. fragilis growth144. However, these B. fragilis mechanisms of action and regulation in ICB therapy remains to be tested.

Bifidobacterium spp.

Bifidobacterium species are gram-positive, nonmotile and often branched anaerobic bacteria that are prominent members of the intestinal microbiota in mammals145. Over 80 species of Bifidobacterium have reported from diverse insects, animals and humans. In humans, bifidobacteria have been suggested to be transferred from mothers to infants, with B. longum, B. adolescentis, B. breve, B. pseudocatenulatum, and B. pseudolongum being the most prominent species. Notably, Bifidobacterium species express a variety of polysaccharide metabolism pathways and are implicated in human milk oligosaccharides (HMOs) utilization and improved intestinal immunity. As a result, diverse Bifidobacterium species/strains have been developed as probiotics146. In cancer immunotherapy, the comparative analysis of mouse colonies (Taconic and Jackson laboratories) with differential microbiota composition by 16S rDNA sequencing and ICB-responsiveness identified several Bifidobacterium species associated with improved antitumor activity99. Notably, oral administration of Bifidobacterium species consortia (B. bifidum, B. longum, B. lactis and B. breve) in antibiotic-treated and inactive-microbiota containing Taconic mice was sufficient to promote the anti-PD-L1 antitumor activity99. Subsequent studies also demonstrated that intratumoral accumulation of Bifidobacterium species (B. bifidum, B. longum, B. lactis and B. breve) enhanced CD47-based immunotherapy via STING signaling (Fig. 5B)147. Moreover, B. breve was subsequently shown to express a T cell-reactive epitope (SVYRYYGL) shared with melanoma that stimulates antitumor responses (Fig. 5C)148, showing the potential for microbiota species/strain-specific cross reactivity with cancer neoantigens.

B. pseudolongum and other microbiota (Lactobacillus johnsonii and Olsenella species) were recovered in ICB-responsive patients and shown to promote ICB therapy in different mouse models149. B. pseudolongum was further characterized and shown to enhance ICB antitumor activity through production of the inosine and activation of adenosine A2A receptor on T cells (Fig. 5D), which stimulated the expression of IFNγ and acted together with myeloid cells to boost the antitumor activity of cytotoxic CD8 T cells149. Interestingly, adenosine metabolism into inosine has been shown to induce stemness features in CAR-T cells and enhances their antitumor activity150. Alternatively, B. longum was shown to enhance the activity of anti-PD-1 and anti-CTLA-4 antibodies in a mouse renal cell carcinoma model151. Moreover, fecal microbiome analyses of 96 patients with NSCLC revealed B. bifidum was abundant in ICB-responsive patients and was sufficient to promote PD-1 blockade or oxaliplatin antitumor activity in mouse models, which was abrogated in Tlr2−/− animals152. Although the precise B. bifidum pathways and molecules responsible for enhanced ICB antitumor activity are unclear, comparative genomics and transcriptomics analyses of the B. bifidum strains suggested that unique peptidoglycan biosynthesis may mediate enhanced IFN-γ signaling in vivo152. These studies suggest different Bifidobacterium species are capable of stimulating systemic immune responses and promoting cancer immunotherapy, but may utilize different molecules and mechanisms of action. The development of improved genetic methods in bifidobacteria should help validate and elucidate the key pathways and molecules responsible for enhancing cancer immunotherapy153.

Clostridium spp.

Clostridium species are gram-positive anaerobic endospore-forming rod-shaped bacteria found in soil, animals and humans with greater than a hundred different species associated with diverse functions154. In humans, C. difficile155 and C. botulinum156 are two prominent toxin-expressing pathogens that are major causes of disease. C. difficile toxin B has been suggested to induce antitumor immunity in mouse models157. Other non-pathogenic Clostridium species such as C. sporogenes, C. butyricum, C. novyi and others can be found in the gut microbiota of healthy animals and humans. In cancer therapy, the C. novyi-NT strain has been explored to enhance the efficacy of radiation therapy based on the hypothesis that anaerobic bacteria can selectively destroy the hypoxic regions of tumors158,159 and has been advanced to clinical studies with treatment-refractory solid tumors160. For immunotherapy, the analysis of human ICB-responsive fecal microbiota and FMT studies in mouse models showed multiple Clostridium species are correlated with anti-PD-L1 antitumor activity161. C. butyricum was shown to restore efficacy of ICB in lung cancer patients receiving proton pump inhibitors162. These studies demonstrate Clostridium species can impact cancer progression and efficacy of immunotherapy, but the biosynthetic pathways in the bacteria have not been evaluated and should be accessible in the future with improved Clostridium genetics163.

Enterococcus spp.

Enterococcus species are gram-positive aerobic cocci bacteria that have been identified from animals, insects, humans, and diverse environments164,165. Commensal species/strains of Enterococcus have been reported to protect animals against diverse pathogens and have even been developed as probiotics for humans, livestock and pets166. However, antibiotic usage has resulted in antibiotic-resistant and pathogenic strains of E. faecium and E. faecalis, which are now major causes of healthcare-associated infections world-wide167,168. Specific Enterococcus species and strains are also associated with autoimmune diseases. For example, translocation of E. gallinarum to the liver and other tissues triggers autoimmune responses in mice and humans43. Alternatively, E. faecalis strains that produce genotoxins are correlated with alcoholic hepatitis in mouse models and in human patients44. E. faecium strains have been isolated from inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) patients and are sufficient to induce colitis in mouse models169–171. Moreover, E. faecium intestinal domination following antibiotic use promotes graft-versus-host disease (GVHD) and is correlated with increased mortality in allogeneic hematopoietic cell transplantation patients172. Commensal and pathogenic strains of E. faecium can carry a plasmid encoding botulinum neurotoxins173 as well as pore-forming toxins that utilize human leukocyte antigen class I (HLA-I) complex as receptors174. In cancer immunotherapy, several Enterococcus species including E. faecium, E. faecalis, E. gallinarum, E. durans, E. hirae and E. mundtii were recovered in ICB-responsive cancer patients98,175,176. Subsequent studies have shown that E. hirae expressing the tape measure protein (TMP) from phage cross-reacts with the oncogenic protein PSMB4 and stimulates H-2Kb-restricted CD8 T cell responses to enhance cyclophosphamide or anti-PD-1 cancer therapy (Fig. 5E)177. Alternatively, the expression of flagellin in E. gallinarum strain MRx0518 has been reported to activate TLR5-dependent immune responses and promote antitumor activity (Fig. 5F)178,179.

Before the discovery of Enterococcus in the microbiota of ICB-responsive cancer patients, the investigation of E. faecium and E. faecalis in a roundworm (Caenorhabditis elegans) model of infection revealed secreted antigen A (SagA), a peptidoglycan hydrolase unique to E. faecium that was sufficient to promote intestinal immunity in worms and mice180–182. Biochemical and structural studies then demonstrated that SagA is a NlpC/p60-family cysteine endopeptidase that generates small non-crosslinked muropeptides183,184, which activates the peptidoglycan PRR nucleotide-binding oligomerization domain-containing protein 2 (NOD2). In mouse models of ICB cancer immunotherapy, commensal and antibiotic-resistant strains of E. faecium that express SagA, but not E. faecalis strains, were sufficient to promote ICB (anti-PD-L1, anti-PD-1, anti-CTLA-4) anti-tumor activity against different cancer types185. Furthermore, other Enterococcus species including E. durans, E. hirae and E. mundtii that have SagA orthologs with significant (>80%) protein identity, similar expression levels and biochemical activity in vitro were also sufficient to enhance anti-PD-L1 antitumor activity in vivo185. Notably, heterologous expression of SagA in inactive bacterial species (E. faecalis) was also sufficient to promote anti-PD-L1 antitumor activity in antibiotic-treated as well as inactive microbiota-containing mice from Taconic185. Moreover, E. faecium and E. faecalis-sagA enhancement of ICB antitumor activity was abrogated in Nod2−/− mice185,186. Improved genetics in Enterococcus187 then enabled the generation of the E. faecium ΔsagA strain, which exhibited impaired bacterial growth and cell separation, defective peptidoglycan cleavage and production of GlcNAc-MurNAc dipeptide, abrogated NOD2 activation ex vivo and reduced enhancement of ICB cancer immunotherapy in vivo186. Interestingly, NOD2 activation also promotes the immunotherapy targeted at myeloid receptors such as CD40 and Dectin-1188. These results and other experiments demonstrated SagA-expressing Enterococcus species (E. faecium, E. durans, E. hirae and E. mundtii), but not E. faecalis or E. gallinarum, remodeling of peptidoglycan during bacterial cell separation generates small muropeptides that stimulate NOD2 to promote intestinal and systemic immune responses (Fig. 5G). As vancomycin-resistant E. faecium and E. faecalis strains have acquired unique metabolic and functional pathways189–191, understanding how these functional changes impacts Enterococcus modulation of host immunity and cancer immunotherapy will be an important to address in the future.

Fusobacterium spp.

While F. nucleatum has been shown to promote CRC (Fig. 2E)38,40,41, this microbiota species has also been shown to modulate ICB cancer therapy. For example, F. nucleatum has been reported to enhance the efficacy of PD-L1 blockade in CRC by activating STING signaling and increasing activated CD8+ T cells192. In contrast, metabolomic analysis of F. nucleatum-enriched patient serum samples also revealed higher levels of succinic acid, which was shown to inhibit the cGAS-interferon-β pathway and suppress antitumor responses by limiting CD8 T cell trafficking to the tumor microenvironment (TME) in vivo193. Elimination of F. nucleatum resensitized tumors to immunotherapy in CRC, which suggests F. nucleatum-derived succinic acid may induce resistance to ICB193. Notably, the analysis of CRC patients with microsatellite instability (MSI) versus microsatellite stable (MSS) showed a positive association of F. nucleatum with MSS194, but negative associated with PD-1 expression in patients195. F. nucleatum administration with murine allografts and humanized mouse models of MSS CRC enhanced anti-PD-1 antitumor activity195. Mechanistically, intratumoral F. nucleatum, but not a F. nucleatum enoyl-CoA hydratase (FN0271) mutant strain, was shown to generate abundant butyrate, which inhibited histone deacetylase (HDAC) 3/8 in CD8+ T cells, inducing Tbx21 promoter H3K27 acetylation and expression (Fig. 6A)195. As TBET transcriptionally represses PD-1, butyrate-induced expression was suggested to alleviate CD8+ T cell exhaustion and restore antitumor activity in vivo195. In patients with MSS CRC, high intratumoral F. nucleatum predicts favorable response to anti-PD-1 therapy, indicating that this pathobiont and butyrate may be important microbiota-based biomarkers of ICB response in MSS CRC195. The differential outcomes of F. nucleatum activity and proposed mechanisms from these studies needs to resolved, but may be due to variable metabolomic analyses and use of subcutaneous syngeneic tumor models192,193, compared to orthotopically implanted syngeneic MSS CRC as well as CD34+-humanized mouse models195.

Lactobacillus spp.

Lactobacillus species (>200) are gram-positive microaerophilic, rod-shaped, non-spore-forming bacteria that are found in animal and human microbiota as well as fermented foods and have been developed as probiotics196. As probiotics, Lactobacillus species have diverse metabolic activity and are implicated in promoting colonization resistance against pathogens and enhanced intestinal barrier function. In cancer immunotherapy, specific species and strains of Lactobacillus has been reported to promote ICB antitumor activity. For example, the exopolysaccharide (EPS-R1) from Lactobacillus delbrueckii subsp. bulgaricus, a yogurt derived strain OLL1073R-1, was shown to induce IFN-γ production in vitro and increased NK cell cytotoxic activity in mouse models in vivo197. The phosphorylated form of EPS-R1 was then found to induce ICB antitumor activity in mouse models and suggested to engage the lysophosphatidic acid receptor and upregulate C-C motif chemokine receptor 6 (CCR6) expression in CD8 T cells for tumor clearance (Fig. 6B)198. As CCR6 is a receptor for the chemokine CCL20, EPS-R1 enhancement of ICB therapy was shown to be selective for CCL20-producing tumors198. In addition to L. bulgaricus glycans, the rhamnose-rich hetero-polysaccharide (RHP) of L. plantarum (IMB19 strain) capsular polysaccharide (CPS), but not EPS, was shown to induce IFN-γ from CD8 T cells and promote ICB antitumor activity in vivo (Fig. 6C)199. Furthermore, RHP was found to upregulate the expression of TLR2, and the induction of IFN-γ in CD8 T cells by macrophages ex vivo was abrogated when Tlr2−/− cells were used, suggesting RHP signals through TLR2199. However, whether TLR2 is required for L. plantarum (IMB19) CPS-induced antitumor activity in vivo is still needs to be evaluated. Moreover, another L. plantarum strain (KCTC21024) that has similar composition of CPS loci genes did not stimulate macrophages ex vivo or enhance ICB antitumor activity in vivo, which suggest additional factors in L. plantarum IMB19 may be important for stimulating immune responses.

Lactobacillus rhamnosus is another prominent probiotic species that has been explored for improving health in animals and humans. In particular, the L. rhamnosus GG (ATCC 53103) strain was isolated from a healthy human donor and has been developed as a probiotic for promoting intestinal health200. A variety of L. rhamnosus GG factors including adhesins (pili or fimbriae), secreted proteins (peptidoglycan hydrolases) and MAMPs (lipoteichoic acid, galactose-rich exopolysaccharides) have been implicated in its mechanism of action, but their effects on cancer immunotherapy are unclear without loss of function isogenic mutant strains. For example, L. rhamnosus GG has been suggested to improve ICB antitumor activity in mouse models through the TLR2201 and cGAS/STING202 pathways. Alternatively, L. paracasei production of the phytosphingosine was shown to stimulate the PRR NLRC5 and upregulate the expression of human leukocyte antigens (HLA) or major histocompatibility complexes (MHC) class I expression on cancer cells (Fig. 6D)203, which would theoretically lead to enhanced presentation of tumor antigens to CD8 T cells and thereby promote ICB therapy. These studies highlight MAMPs and metabolites from dietary Lactobacillus species may stimulate immune responses and promote ICB antitumor activity, but the mechanisms of the specific Lactobacillus species/strains still require the analysis of isogenic mutant strains in vivo.

In addition to the activation of PRRs, Lactobacillus metabolism of dietary metabolites can also enhance ICB antitumor activity204. For example, L. reuteri ATCC BAA-2837 has been reported to catabolize Trp into indole-3-aldehyde (I3A), translocate into melanoma, stimulate IFN-γ-producing CD8 T cells and promote ICB antitumor activity (Fig. 6E)205. Notably, L. reuteri production of I3A was shown to be required for antitumor activity, as heat-killed L. reuteri and an aromatic amino acid aminotransferase mutant strain (ΔArAT) that is defective in converting Trp into I3A were inactive. Moreover, L. reuteri potentiation of ICB antitumor activity was abrogated in AHR knockout mice. Furthermore, dietary Trp potentiated L. reuteri and ICB-induced antitumor activity. Collectively, these studies show L. reuteri metabolism of Trp in the diet generates I3A, which activates AHR in CD8 T cells to promote ICB antitumor activity, which was correlated with survival in advanced melanoma patients205. L. johnsonii metabolism of Trp has also been reported to promote ICB antitumor activity206. However, L. johnsonii administration and metabolism of Trp into indole-3-lactic acid (ILA) showed no inhibition of tumor growth compared to IPA administration, suggesting another microbiota species may be needed. Indeed, the co-administration of L. johnsonii with C. sporogenes was sufficient to convert ILA into IPA and as described above modulate the T cell stemness and enhance the efficacy of ICB antitumor activity (Fig. 6F)206. In CRC, ILA generated by L. gallinarum or L. plantarum was also found to protect against tumorigenesis207,208. Alternatively, 3-IAA was also found to be enriched in ICB-responders and enhanced the efficacy of chemotherapy toward PDAC88. L. gallinarum-derived indole-3-carboxylic acid (ICA) has also been suggested to boost anti-PD1 efficacy in CRC by inhibiting regulatory T cells209. These studies suggest Lactobacillus species/strains can generate diverse metabolites that engage alternative signaling pathways to modulate cancer progression and immunotherapy.

Other cancer immunotherapy promoting microbiota species and metabolites.

Faecalibacterium species are Gram-positive anaerobic rod-shaped, nonmotile and non-spore-forming bacteria that are prevalent in animal and human microbiota210. F. prausnitzii in particular has been implicated in improved intestinal barrier function and is depleted in IBD and CRC patients210. In cancer immunotherapy, Faecalibacterium was enriched in ICB-responsive patients211,212 and associated with improved antitumor activity upon FMT in mouse models100,212. Notably, the F. prausnitzii strain EXL01 that is already in clinical development for IBD, promotes ICB antitumor responses in mouse models213. In addition, monocolonization studies in mouse models showed F. prausnitzii was sufficient to promote ICB antitumor activity as well as ameliorate ICB-induced colitis214. Although F. prausnitzii enhances T cell activation with ICB ex vivo and has been associated with the production of SCFAs215, the precise pathways and molecules responsible for F. prausnitzii enhancement of ICB antitumor activity is still unclear and requires further investigation.

Ruminococcus species are also prominent Gram-positive anaerobic nonmotile and non-spore-forming bacteria, but has cocci morphology and is increased in IBD as well as neurological disorders216. In cancer, Ruminococcus species have been implicated in promoting colon cancer progression as well as response to ICB therapy217–219. For example, R. gnavus (and Ileibacterium valens) synthesis of amino acid-conjugated bile acid (AA-CAs) is suggested to exacerbate high-fat diet-induced CRC progression54. Alternatively, tissue-resident R. gnavus and Blautia producta have been suggested to reduce colon tumor growth and promote the activation of CD8 T cells by degradation of inhibitory lyso-glycerophospholipids217. With ICB therapy, anti-PD-1 treatment combined with TREM2 deficiency in mice induced expansion of R. gnavus in the gut microbiota and expression of proinflammatory pathways in intestinal macrophages, which enhanced the clearance of tumors220. Interestingly, IBD-associated strains of R. gnavus can generate unique glucorhamnan heteroglycans221 and high molecular weight capsular polysaccharides222 that modulate the activation of proinflammatory pathways. Whether these R. gnavus glycans impacts cancer immunotherapy is unknown and may be important to investigate. These F. prausnitzii and R. gnavus studies highlight that IBD-associated microbiota species can modulate cancer progression and therapy, but their mechanisms of action may depend upon their tissue distribution (gut versus tumor) and regulation by host factors.

The characterization of microbiota species in cancer immunotherapy has also motivated renewed analysis of Streptococcus pyogenes, one of the key components of Coley’s toxins. S. pyogenes is Gram-positive aerobic, non-motile and non-spore-forming cocci bacteria, typically found in the skin microbiota and can cause streptococcal infections. The biochemical fractionation and evaluation of S. pyogenes immunogenic activity revealed a membrane lipid, 18:1/18:0/18:1/18:0 cardiolipin, that was capable of inducing TNF-α expression through the TLR2-TLR1 signaling pathway (Fig. 6G)223. Of note, the synthesis of cardiolipin derivatives with altered acyl chains had no measurable activity, demonstrating the orientation and structures of lipid acyl chains are crucial for immune activation, similar to the A. muciniphila phospholipids with branched acyl chains (a15:0-i15:0 PE) (Fig. 5A)133. These S. pyogenes cardiolipins may explain the antitumor activity of Coley’s toxins, but these unique lipids and S. pyogenes mutant strains still need to be evaluated in mouse models in vivo. Interestingly, TLR4 activation by microbiota species that produce hexa-acylated lipopolysaccharides (LPS), but not penta-acylated LPS, was how to promote ICB therapy224. These studies indicate specific microbiota lipids can activate TLRs and impact the efficacy of ICB therapy.

In addition to modulating the approved ICB (CTLA-4, PD-1, PD-L1) therapies, specific microbiota species may modulate the expression and/or function of other immune checkpoints or receptors. For example, down-regulation of PD-L2 is correlated with anti-PD-1 therapy and was hypothesized to be an important factor for microbiota modulation225. Toward this end, the screening of microbiota consortia and species revealed that Coprobacillus cateniformis was sufficient to down-regulate the expression of PD-L2 and its receptor, repulsive guidance molecule b (RGMb) and anti-tumor immunity225. Although the C. cateniformis mechanism of action and active factor remains to be determined, these studies demonstrate specific microbiota or antibody-mediated blockade of the PD-L2–RGMb pathway can promote antitumor responses to PD-1 checkpoint blockade, which reveals an alternative target for improving cancer patient responses to ICB therapy.

The microbiota generation of trimethylamine N-oxide (TMAO) has also been implicated in health and disease. For example, microbiota metabolism of phosphatidylcholine into TMAO has been shown to promotes cardiovascular disease226. In cancer, TMAO has been reported to trigger pyroptosis in cancer cells and activate tumor specific cytotoxic CD8 T cells in mouse models227. High TMAO concentrations in plasma of patients with triple negative breast cancer are positively correlated with improved responsiveness to anti-PD-1 therapy and enrichment of Clostridiales TMAO-producers (Fig. 6H)227. In PDAC, TMAO levels were also correlated with improved responses to ICB therapy and proposed to function by inducing the type I IFN pathway in macrophages228. Moreover, microbiota containing CutC (the enzyme responsible for generating trimethylamine, the TMAO precursor) correlated with long-term survival in PDAC patients and improved anti-PD1 responses in melanoma patients. The CutC-expressing and potential TMAO-producing microbiota species include Clostridium tetani, Clostridium tepidum, Clostridium culturomicium, Enterococcus asini and Enterococcus phoeniculicola.

SCFA-producing microbiota species have also been suggested to impact the efficacy of cancer immunotherapy. For example, systemic SCFAs been reported to limit antitumor activity of CTLA-4 blockade by up-regulation of costimulatory proteins such as CD80/CD86 on dendritic cells and ICOS on T cells229. Alternatively, SCFAs are suggested to modulate CD8 T cell responses230 and improve adoptive immunotherapy of CAR T cells by modulating mTOR activity231. Further analysis suggests that SCFA modulation of CD8 T cell responses may be mediated by pentanoate-producing microbiota species such as Megasphaera massiliensis231. Moreover, Roseburia intestinalis has been reported to generate butyrate and boost anti-PD-1 efficacy in CRC by activating cytotoxic CD8 T cells232. Interestingly, a multi-kingdom network and functional analysis reveal that the fungus Schizosaccharomyces octosporus alone or with bacterial species may ferment dietary fiber into SCFAs in ICB responders233. Given the differential roles of SCFAs in cancer progression and immunotherapy responses, it will be important to evaluate whether other SCFA-producing microbiota consortia or species promote or inhibit tumorigenesis with different types of cancers and therapies. These studies of TMAO and SCFAs highlight how the analysis of microbiota species and metabolites correlated with cancer progression can reveal specific microbiota molecules, pathways and species that may be important for predicting therapy responses.

Cancer immunotherapy suppressive microbiota species.

Antibiotic perturbation of the microbiota is well appreciated to interfere with pathogen-colonization resistance and modulation of host immunity234, but how antibiotic-induced dybiosis impacts specific microbiota species in cancer immunotherapy is not well understood. In this regard, Enterocloster species (E. clostridioformis and E. bolteae) were enriched in mice after broad-spectrum antibiotic treatment and correlated with the down-regulation of mucosal addressin cell adhesion molecule 1 (MAdCAM-1) (Fig. 7A)235. MAdCAM-1 is a key adhesion protein that mediates the localization of α4β7+CD4+ regulatory TH17 cells in the gut235. Antibiotic treatment alone or oral gavage of Enterocloster species induced the migration of the α4β7+CD4+ regulatory TH17 cells into the tumor, which compromises the efficacy of immunotherapy235. The Enterocloster species suppression of ICB antitumor activity was also recapitulated by genetic deficiency or by antibody-mediated neutralization of MAdCAM-1 and its receptor, α4β7 integrin. This inhibitory effect of antibiotic treatment was prevented by FMT or interleukin-17A neutralization235. As low serum levels of soluble MAdCAM-1 are correlated with poor responses to ICB therapy in different cancer patients, the antibiotic-induced disruption of the MAdCAM-1-α4β7 axis by specific microbiota (Enterocloster) species may be an actionable gut immune checkpoint in cancer immunosurveillance235. Further investigation of Enterocloster causative factors and other antibiotic-induced ICB-inhibitory microbiota species will be an exciting area of future research.

In addition to antibiotic-induced microbiota species, other immunosuppressive microbiota species may also confer resistance to ICB cancer therapy. For example, Gram-negative bacteria were associated with an inflammatory host intestinal gene signature and, therefore, have an unfavorable response to ICB118. Moreover, the analysis of P. anaerobius, which induced MDSCs and promoted CRC42, showed that these bacteria also impair T cell responses and confer resistance to anti-PD1 therapy in mouse models of CRC236. P. anaerobius administration activated integrin α2β1–NF-κB signaling in CRC cells, which induced the secretion of CXCL1 and recruited CXCR2+ MDSCs into tumors. The analysis of P. anaerobius factors revealed a secreted N-acetylmuramoyl-L-alanine amidase (lytC_22) that bound to the Slamf4 receptor on MDSCs and promoted ARG1 and iNOS expression associated with MDSC reprogramming (Fig. 7B)236. Notably, antibody blockade of either integrin α2β1 or the Slamf4 receptor was sufficient to overcome P. anaerobius-mediated resistance to anti-PD1 therapy in CRC236. These examples show immunosuppressive microbiota species and metabolites can impair ICB antitumor activity, which highlight an important aspect of microbiota function in cancer immunotherapy to investigate in the future.

Summary of microbiota mechanisms in cancer progression and immunotherapy.

The studies summarized above have revealed some conserved features by which microbiota composition and specific species modulate cancer progression and efficacy of therapy. Importantly, only H. pylori has been cleared demonstrated to promote cancer in humans, so further mechanistic and clinical studies need to be performed for the other “oncomicrobiota” species described above. For example, determining the tissue distribution and cell types involved is crucial for characterizing specific microbiota species mechanisms of action. While the gastrointestinal tract is the most prominent tissue niche of microbiota in animals and humans, specific microbiota species and/or molecules can translocate across mucosal and epithelial barriers and interact directly with immune cells and/or migrate into tumors237. These long-distance effects of the gut microbiota may therefore have significant effects on cancer progression and response to therapies237. Moreover, the gut microbiota composition can be altered by ICB therapy96 and other cancer treatments6. In addition, ICB therapy has been shown to induce the translocation of gut bacteria into tumors and lymph nodes by dendritic cells (DCs)238. Understanding the tissue and cellular tropism of specific microbiota species is therefore essential for elucidating their potential mechanisms of action. Beyond their localization in vivo, the activity of specific microbiota species may be strain-specific and important to consider for identifying unique pathways and molecules responsible for modulating cancer progression and therapy. Of note, microbiota species associated with inflammation and autoimmunity have emerged as immunotherapy-promoting species, so the identification of immunostimulatory factors from these microbes may be leveraged to enhance cancer treatment. With these key features in mind, specific pathways and molecules have emerged to explain the impact of some microbiota species on cancer progression and therapy.

The specific microbiota species, pathways and molecules that modulate cancer progression and immunotherapy can be classified into major categories (Fig. 1) as follows: i) synthesis of toxins that promote cancer cell proliferation (S. typhi typhoid toxin33, B. fragilis toxin26, C. difficile TcdB34 and pks+ E. coli colibactin28–30), ii) expression/secretion of virulence or adhesion factors that modulate antitumor immunity (H. pylori CagA31, S. typhi AvrA32, F. nucleatum Fap238 and RadD39 as well as P. anaerobius PCWBR242 and lytC_22236), iii) direct modulation of carcinogens (E. flexneri nitrosamine metabolism79) and cancer therapeutics (gut microbiota metabolism of irinotecan80 and intratumoral microbiota metabolism of gemcitabine81), iv) production of MAMPs that stimulate immune PRRs (CDN activation of STING138, E. gallinarum strain MRx0518 flagellin activation of TLR5178, SagA-Enterococcus generation of muropeptide NOD2 agonists180–185,187, S. pyogenes cardiolipin activation of TLR2223, L. bulgaricus EPS-R1 activation of lysophosphatidic acid receptor198, L. plantarum RHP-CPS activation of TLR2199, L. paracasei phytosphingosine stimulation of NLRC5203), v) generation of secondary metabolites that modulate host metabolism and/or cell signaling that can synergize with immunotherapies (B. pseudolongum inosine activation of adenosine A2A receptor149, L. johnsonii-C. sporogenes-mediated production of IPA206, L. reuteri I3A stimulation of AHR205, L. reuteri reuterin alteration of redox balance and translation67) and vi) expression of cross-reactive antigens that drive adaptive antitumor immune responses (B. breve expression of T cell-reactive epitope (SVYRYYGL) on melanoma148, E. hirae expression of TMP that cross-reacts with the oncogenic protein PSMB4177). These studies highlight specific pathways and molecules from specific microbiota species that have been implicated in modulating cancer progression and immunotherapy. Given the variability of individual microbiota, diet and genetics, understanding how these microbiota species and mechanisms interacts with other microbiota species, diet and genetic variations in animal models and in humans will be important for establishing causation and therapeutic development. Moreover, as different microbiota species can generate the similar active metabolites, the analysis of “functionally active microbiota metabolite composition” may be more important than microbiota species composition.

Many microbiota factors suggested to promote or suppress immune signaling and cancer immunotherapy remain to be validated in the native microbiota species or strains due to limited genetic methods. Indeed, for many microbiota species and strains multiple pathways and molecules have been suggested for their mechanism(s) of action and need to be further investigated to demonstrate causation. Amongst these proposed ICB-regulatory microbiota species and molecules, only E. faecium SagA generation of muropeptides185,186, L. reuteri production of I3A205 and F. nucleatum production of butyrate195 have been validated by biochemical studies, generation of isogenic bacterial mutant strains and subsequent analysis in mouse models of ICB cancer therapy in vivo. Furthermore, a variety of bacterial polysaccharides have been suggested to stimulate TLR2. However, based on the structural studies of TLR2 and its heterodimers with TLR1 or TLR6, it is unclear how the ligand binding domain of these TLRs, which has been shown to bind lipopeptides and other lipids239–241, can specifically recognize glycans. Potential synergy between TLR2 signaling and C-type lectins242, which can recognize glycans should be explored with different microbiota species and their polysaccharides in the future. More detailed genetic analysis of microbiota species and structure-based investigation of MAMPs and other microbiota metabolites with their potential protein targets are needed. Furthermore, these microbiota species and metabolites likely do not act alone in vivo and may have synergistic or antagonist effects with other microbiota species and metabolites that need to be explored in the future.

For other classes of microbiota-generated metabolites (e.g. Trp-metabolites, bile acids and others), the high micromolar and millimolar concentrations required for their activity in cells suggests potential engagement of multiple or additional protein targets for their mechanisms of action that will also depend on the cell-type. This is exemplified by the seemingly conflicting roles of SCFAs in cancer progression and modulation of cancer therapy described above. Moreover, recent metabolomic studies suggests significantly greater diversity and abundance of microbiota-generated bile acids in tissues243,244. As bile acids have been reported to exhibit pro- and anti-inflammatory activities245, understanding specific microbiota species/strains responsible for producing different types of bile acids and which signaling pathways they engage will be important for dissecting their mechanisms of action. In this regard, the development of activity-based probes and specific inhibitors targeting microbiota enzymes (Fig. 8A)246–248 can complement genetic approaches for functional studies in vitro and in vivo. For example, fluorophosphonate probes have enabled the identification of uncharacterized serine hydrolases in human microbiota (Fig. 8B)249,250 and bile acid probes have revealed active microbiota BSHs (Fig. 8C)251,252. The chemoproteomics of microbiota-generated metabolites (SCFAs253,254, BAs255–257 and Trp-derivatives258 can also help elucidate their protein targets and mechanism(s) of action in microbes or host cells (Fig. 8D–G)259. Moreover, the generation of microbiota metabolite probes can facilitate the profiling of specific pathways in different microbiota species and analysis of their trafficking into specific tissues and cell-types in vivo260.

Translation of microbiota mechanisms for next-generation cancer diagnostics, interventions and therapies.

Although the mechanisms of many ICB-associated microbiota species, pathways and molecules still need to be validated in vivo or elucidated, the studies highlighted above already reveal key microbiota mechanisms, pathways and molecules that can guide the development of next-generation cancer diagnostics, interventions and therapeutics to improve patient outcomes. For example, the discovery of oncomicrobiota species that encode virulence factors and toxins provide unique opportunities to inhibit cancer progression with antibiotics or phage therapy, which has been achieved with H. pylori in gastric cancer and could be extended to other oncomicrobiota species. Alternatively, more precise oncomicrobiota-selective approaches could be employed such as small molecule inhibitors of pks+ E. coli genotoxin (colibactin) biosynthesis262 or antibody blockade of F. nucleatum RadD-CD147 interactions39. Furthermore, understanding microbiota metabolism of chemotherapies should motivate the development of adjuvants to limit their toxicity and improve the efficacy of existing chemotherapies80,81.

The identification of ICB-promoting microbiota mechanisms, pathways and molecules provide new opportunities to improve microbiota-based biomarkers to predict and enhance the efficacy of cancer immunotherapies and potentially limit irAEs. For example, select microbiota species have also been developed for Gut OncoMicrobiome Signatures (GOMS)263 and custom-based scoring of microbiota signatures264 to generate readily applicable PCR-based profiling methods. These approaches will likely need to be extended to microbiota species strain-level and may depend upon the specific type of cancer immunotherapy, such as different ICB and CAR-T therapies211. These microbiota-based biomarkers should go beyond profiling specific microbiota species/strains and include key microbiota genes (e.g. SagA, aromatic amino acid aminotransferases and others) or metabolites (e.g. muropeptides, I3A and others), which have been shown to promote cancer immunotherapy and paired with the profiling of their associated host signaling pathways (e.g. NOD2, AHR and others).

The studies highlighted above also indicate promising microbiota-based approaches for intervention. For example, clinical trials for FMT with cancer immunotherapy have already been explored103,104 and are in progress with larger patient cohorts10. To circumvent the potential challenges (pathogens and variability) with FMT, activity or mechanism-based microbiota consortia have also been developed to improve immunotherapies and are also being explored in clinical trials10. Alternatively, nutrition-based (high fiber diet) approaches or existing probiotics could also be employed to improve cancer therapy212,265, but better understanding of specific diets on microbiota composition needs to be established and is ongoing266. Specific microbiota species (Bifidobacterium) and probiotics are already being evaluated for promote ICB therapy10. However, the efficacy of existing probiotics is also needs to be more carefully evaluated and may depend upon baseline microbiota composition and diet of patients212,265.

To improve the antitumor activity of probiotics or live biotherapeutics (LBPs), recent insights from host metabolism and microbiota mechanisms can be leveraged to genetically engineer bacteria. For example, L-arginine enhancement of CD8 T cell metabolism and effector function267 inspired the engineering Escherichia coli Nissle 1917 (EcN)268. By deleting the arginine repressor gene (ArgR) and mutating feedback inhibition, the engineered L-Arg EcN strain could convert ammonia, a metabolic waste product that accumulates in tumors into arginine, which upon intratumoral or intravenous injection enhanced the efficacy of ICB antitumor activity in mouse models268. While L-arginine was not initially associated ICB-responders, recent studies indicate circulating L-arginine may predict the survival of cancer patients treated with ICB269. In addition to metabolites, EcN can also be engineered to secrete tumor antigens and chemokines to promote CAR-T cell immunotherapy270. Alternatively, a skin-resident microbiota species such as Staphylococcus epidermidis that induces TH17 cell immune responses can be leveraged to express tumor neoantigens that induce antitumor T cell responses271 as well as mucosal B cell and antibody responses272. With discovery of microbiota-tumor cross-reactive antigens148,177,273 and additional cancer neoantigens274, the engineering of immune-active microbiota species with these cancer antigens may provide a powerful approach towards new cancer vaccines. To enhance the immunogenicity of specific microbiota species or probiotics, ICB-promoting microbiota factors such as Enterococcus SagA can be introduced to deliver more active MAMPs (muropeptides), as shown with engineering of probiotic Lactococcus lactis185. Of note, oral administration of L. lactis-sagA, but not L. lactis or L. lactis-expressing catalytically inactive sagA, was sufficient to promote ICB antitumor activity in mouse models185. As antibiotic-resistant Enterococcus is a major health problem and commensal Enterococcus use is restricted in humans in many countries189–191, expression of immune-active microbiota factors such as SagA in relatively safe probiotics may provide an alternative approach to enhance ICB efficacy in cancer patients. These genetically engineered LBPs highlight exciting new approaches to leverage host and microbiota mechanisms, but will have to be carefully evaluated for safety, containment and efficacy in the future.

The discovery and characterization of specific microbiota mechanisms also provides new opportunities for the development of biologics, prebiotics and small molecules to enhance cancer immunotherapy. For example, inhibition of P. anaerobius adhesion or N-acetylmuramoyl-L-alanine amidase-mediated induction of MDSCs by antibody blockade of α2β1 or the Slamf4 receptor restored ICB antitumor activity236. Alternatively, Lactobacillus species glycans, EPS and CPS, have been suggested to activate TLR2 and promote ICB antitumor activity198,199. Indeed, more potent synthetic TLR2 agonists such as diprovocins have been shown to promote ICB therapy275–277 and other TLR agonists are being explored in clinicals to enhance the efficacy of different ICB therapies278,279. Furthermore, synthetic STING agonists are being actively investigated for antitumor immunity138. The studies of SagA-Enterococcus activation of NOD2 and enhancement of ICB therapy185, suggests previously developed synthetic NOD2 agonists such as mifamurtide280, new formulations of muropeptides281 or next-generation of synthetic agonists282,283 should be evaluated to improve the efficacy of ICB therapy. Of note, NOD2 was identified as a tumor suppressor in HCC284 and melanoma285 and target for mifamurtide-based drug (Mepact)286, which has been approved in Europe to prevent the recurrence of pediatric osteosarcoma. The analysis of other microbiota metabolite (e.g. Trp metabolites and bile acids) mechanisms should also inspire the development of synthetic modulators of their ICB-associated protein targets (e.g. AHR and other nuclear receptors). In fact, rationally designed AHR agonists have been developed as new therapeutic leads287. These examples highlight the tremendous potential for elucidating and leveraging microbiota mechanisms for advancing cancer immunotherapy.

Conclusions

The studies summarized above showcase how specific pathogens and microbiota species influence cancer progression and treatment outcomes. The advances in genomics, proteomics and metabolomics have provided important methodologies for characterizing cancer and therapy-associated microbiota species, pathways and molecules. These remarkable discoveries are already providing new opportunities for developing improved microbiota-based biomarkers to predict cancer progression and therapy responses as well as inspiring next-generation biologic and small molecule therapeutics aimed at enhancing patient outcomes. However, the mechanisms of most cancer and therapy-associated microbiota species still need to be elucidated and validated with additional genetic methods as well as chemical and biochemical studies. Understanding the mechanisms of specific microbiota modulation of cancer progression and therapy is therefore still a major challenge and exciting area of research that would benefit from innovative and robust chemical genetic approaches to identify active microbiota pathways and molecules.

Acknowledgments

HCH acknowledges support from National Institutes of Health R01CA245292 grant. Figures were generated with BioRender and ChemDraw.

Figure 1. The Yin and Yang of microbiota on cancer progression and therapy.

Panels (i)–(iii) illustrate mechanisms by which the microbiota promote cancer progression: i) Synthesis of toxins that directly promote cancer cell proliferation, ii) Expression/secretion virulence or adhesion factors that modulate antitumor immunity, iii) Direct modulation of cancer therapies, Panels (iv)–(vi) highlight how the microbiota contribute to cancer therapy and suppression: iv) Production of microbe-associated molecular patterns (MAMPs) that stimulate immune pattern recognition receptors (PRRs) and inflammatory pathways that synergize with immunotherapies, v) Generation of secondary metabolites that modulate host metabolism and/or cell signaling that synergize with immunotherapies and vi) Expression of cross-reactive antigens that drive adaptive antitumor immune responses.

Figure 2. Mechanisms of bacterial pathogens and microbiota species that promote cancer progression.

A) H. pylori injects CagA in epithelial cells to promote tumorogenesis31. B) S. anginosus promotes gastric tumorigenesis through its surface protein TMPC binding to Annexin-2 and activation of MAPK signaling24. C) S. typhi injects typhoid toxin33 and/or effector AvrA32 into epithelial cells, which induces cell death and promote inflammation. D) B. fragilis toxin26 and C. difficile TcdB toxin34 damage epithelial cells and promote inflammation. E) pks+ E. coli produce colibactin to induce DNA damage and genotoxicity in epithelial cells28–30. F) F. nucleatum Fap2 interacts with D-galactose-β(1–3)-N-acetyl-D-galactosamine (Gal-GalNAc) on cancer cells38, RadD binds directly to CD147 and triggers the PI3K-AKT-NF-κB signaling cascade to promote tumorigenesis in vivo39 and generates formate to promote cancer stemness via AHR signaling41. G) P. anaerobius surface protein PCWBR2 interacts with α2/β1 integrin, which stimulate the PI3K-Akt pathway and NF-κB activation in cancer cells42. H) K. pneumoniae surface protein PBP1B interacts with and activates TLR4, leading to activation of oncogenic and pro-inflammatory signaling46.

Figure 3. Mechanisms of microbiota species that suppress cancer progression.

A) SCFA-producing microbiota consortia activate Gpr109a in colonic myeloid cells, induce the differentiation of regulatory T cells and suppress the development of CRC66. B) L. reuteri reuterin alters redox balance, inhibits protein translation and reduces the proliferation and survival of colon cancer cells67. C) C. maltaromaticum binds estrogen-induced SLC3A2 via a D-alanine-D-alanine carboxypeptidase and generates vitamin D in collaboration with other microbiota species, which activates VDR signaling to suppress CRC69.

Figure 4. Microbiota metabolism of carcinogens and cancer chemotherapy.

A) E. flexneri metabolism of nitrosamines in urinary bladder cancer79. B) Microbiota β-glucuronidase metabolism of irinotecan80. C) Microbiota metabolism of gemcitabine81.

Figure 5. Chemical mechanisms of specific microbiota species and metabolites on immunity and cancer immunotherapy.

A) A. muciniphila Amuc_1100131, a15:0-i15:0 PE133 and CDN136 have been proposed to stimulate TLRs and STING, respectively. B) Bifidobacterium consortia (B. bifidum, B. longum, B. lactis and B. breve) is proposed to enhance immunotherapy via STING signaling147. C) B. breve was shown to express a T cell-reactive epitope (SVYRYYGL) on melanoma and stimulate antigen-specific antitumor responses148. D) B. pseudolongum is proposed to generate inosine and activate adenosine A2A receptor on T cells149. E) E. hirae tape measure protein (TMP1) cross-reacts with the oncogenic protein PSMB4 and stimulates H-2Kb-restricted CD8+ T lymphocyte responses to enhance cyclophosphamide or anti-PD-1 cancer therapy177. F) E. gallinarum MRx0518 flagellin activates TLR5-dependent immune responses and promotes ICB-antitumor activity178,179. G) SagA-expressing Enterococcus species remodels peptidoglycan and generates small muropeptides that stimulate NOD2, which promotes intestinal and systemic immune responses180–187.

Figure 6. Chemical mechanisms of specific microbiota species and metabolites on immunity and cancer immunotherapy continued.

A) Wild-type F. nucleatum, but not a F. nucleatum enoyl-CoA hydratase (FN0271) mutant strain generates butyrate, which inhibits HDAC3/8 in CD8+ T cells and induces Tbx21 promoter H3K27 acetylation/expression, suppressed PD-1 expression and alleviates CD8+ T cell exhaustion to restore antitumor activity195. B) L. bulgaricus EPS-R1 is proposed to engage the lysophosphatidic acid receptor and upregulate CCR6 expression in CD8 T cells for tumor killing198. C) L. plantarum RHP-CPS is proposed to activate TLR2 signaling and promote ICB antitumor activity199. D) L. paracasei phytosphingosine stimulation of NLRC5 upregulates the expression of MHC class I expression on cancer cells for enhanced CD8 T cell killing203. E) L. reuteri can metabolize Trp into I3A and stimulate AHR in CD8 T cells to promote ICB antitumor activity205. F) L. johnsonii and C. sporogenes-mediated production of IPA was shown to modulate the T cell stemness by increasing histone H3K27 acetylation at the super-enhancer region of Tcf7 and enhance the efficacy of ICB antitumor activity206. G) S. pyogenes cardiolipin induces TNF-α expression through the TLR2-TLR1 signaling pathway ex vivo223, but has not been shown to promote ICB antitumor activity in vivo. H) Clostridiales and CutC-expressing microbiota species generate TMAO, which induces type I IFN pathway macrophages and promotes ICB antitumor activity227,228.

Figure 7. Mechanisms of microbiota species and metabolites in inhibiting cancer immunotherapy.

A) Enterocloster species down-regulation of MAdCAM-1 induced the migration of the α4β7+CD4+ regulatory TH17 cells into tumors, which suppress the activity of ICB235. B) P. anaerobius N-acetylmuramoyl-L-alanine amidase (lytC_22) interacts the Slamf4 receptor on MDSCs, which confers resistance to ICB antitumor activity236.

Figure 8. Chemical tools for investigating microbiota enzymes and metabolites.

A) ABPP probes, comprising reactive, recognition, and tag groups, were synthesized for targeting specific enzyme families. The recognition group binds to the target enzyme, while the reactive group modifies its active site covalently. The tag facilitates subsequent imaging or proteomic identification and subsequent inhibitor development. ABPP probes for microbiota studies. B) Fluorophosphonate probe allow the identification of uncharacterized serine hydrolases in human microbiota249,250. C) Bile acid probes enable the identification and profiling microbiota BSHs251,252. D) Functionalization of metabolites with chemical tags such as terminal alkynes (blue) facilitate the analysis of covalent or photocrosslinked metabolite-protein interactions in vitro and in vivo. The addition of photoreactive groups such as diazirines (purple) enables the capture of non-covalent metabolite interactions. Subsequent bioorthogonal or click chemistry labeling with azide-modified reagents facilitates the imaging, affinity enrichment and identification of metabolite-protein targets and trafficking. E) alkyne-SCFA probe254,261. F) Bile acid photoaffinity probes: x-alk-LCA and x-alk-CDC255–257. G) Aromatic amino metabolite photoaffinity probes: x-alk-IAA and x-alk-TA258.

Declaration of interests

HCH has filed patent applications for the commercial use of SagA and N-arylpyrazole NOD2 agonists for immunotherapy. HCH receives royalties from Rise Therapeutics for SagA-based probiotics.

This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication. As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript. The manuscript will undergo copyediting, typesetting, and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final form. Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content, and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain.


REFERENCES

1. McCarthy EF (2006). The toxins of William B. Coley and the treatment of bone and soft-tissue sarcomas. The Iowa orthopaedic journal 26, 154–158.16789469 PMC1888599
2. Lobo N , Brooks NA , Zlotta AR , Cirillo JD , Boorjian S , Black PC , Meeks JJ , Bivalacqua TJ , Gontero P , Steinberg GD , (2021). 100 years of Bacillus Calmette-Guerin immunotherapy: from cattle to COVID-19. Nat Rev Urol 18, 611–622. 10.1038/s41585-021-00481-1.34131332 PMC8204595
3. Old LJ , Clarke DA , and Benacerraf B (1959). Effect of Bacillus Calmette-Guerin infection on transplanted tumours in the mouse. Nature 184(Suppl 5), 291–292. 10.1038/184291a0.14428599
4. Hanahan D (2022). Hallmarks of Cancer: New Dimensions. Cancer Discov 12, 31–46. 10.1158/2159-8290.CD-21-1059.35022204
5. Swanton C , Bernard E , Abbosh C , Andre F , Auwerx J , Balmain A , Bar-Sagi D , Bernards R , Bullman S , DeGregori J , (2024). Embracing cancer complexity: Hallmarks of systemic disease. Cell 187, 1589–1616. 10.1016/j.cell.2024.02.009.38552609 PMC12077170
6. Sepich-Poore GD , Zitvogel L , Straussman R , Hasty J , Wargo JA , and Knight R (2021). The microbiome and human cancer. Science 371. 10.1126/science.abc4552.PMC8767999 33766858
7. Zitvogel L , Ma Y , Raoult D , Kroemer G , and Gajewski TF (2018). The microbiome in cancer immunotherapy: Diagnostic tools and therapeutic strategies. Science 359, 1366–1370. 10.1126/science.aar6918.29567708
8. Fernandes MR , Aggarwal P , Costa RGF , Cole AM , and Trinchieri G (2022). Targeting the gut microbiota for cancer therapy. Nature Reviews Cancer 22, 703–722. 10.1038/s41568-022-00513-x.36253536
9. Wong CC , and Yu J (2023). Gut microbiota in colorectal cancer development and therapy. Nat Rev Clin Oncol 20, 429–452. 10.1038/s41571-023-00766-x.37169888
10. Kang X , Lau HC , and Yu J (2024). Modulating gut microbiome in cancer immunotherapy: Harnessing microbes to enhance treatment efficacy. Cell Rep Med 5, 101478. 10.1016/j.xcrm.2024.101478.38631285 PMC11031381
11. Turnbaugh PJ , Ley RE , Hamady M , Fraser-Liggett CM , Knight R , and Gordon JI (2007). The human microbiome project. Nature 449, 804–810. 10.1038/nature06244.17943116 PMC3709439
12. Lloyd-Price J , Mahurkar A , Rahnavard G , Crabtree J , Orvis J , Hall AB , Brady A , Creasy HH , McCracken C , Giglio MG , (2017). Strains, functions and dynamics in the expanded Human Microbiome Project. Nature 550, 61–66. 10.1038/nature23889.28953883 PMC5831082
13. Integrative, H.M.P.R.N.C. (2019). The Integrative Human Microbiome Project. Nature 569, 641–648. 10.1038/s41586-019-1238-8.31142853 PMC6784865
14. Knight R , Vrbanac A , Taylor BC , Aksenov A , Callewaert C , Debelius J , Gonzalez A , Kosciolek T , McCall LI , McDonald D , (2018). Best practices for analysing microbiomes. Nat Rev Microbiol 16, 410–422. 10.1038/s41579-018-0029-9.29795328
15. Bauermeister A , Mannochio-Russo H , Costa-Lotufo LV , Jarmusch AK , and Dorrestein PC (2022). Mass spectrometry-based metabolomics in microbiome investigations. Nat Rev Microbiol 20, 143–160. 10.1038/s41579-021-00621-9.34552265 PMC9578303
16. Durack J , and Lynch SV (2019). The gut microbiome: Relationships with disease and opportunities for therapy. J Exp Med 216, 20–40. 10.1084/jem.20180448.30322864 PMC6314516
17. Neville BA , Forster SC , and Lawley TD (2018). Commensal Koch’s postulates: establishing causation in human microbiota research. Curr Opin Microbiol 42, 47–52. 10.1016/j.mib.2017.10.001.29112885
18. Turocy T , and Crawford JM (2024). Bacterial small molecule metabolites implicated in gastrointestinal cancer development. Nat Rev Microbiol. 10.1038/s41579-024-01103-4.PMC12377021 39375475
19. White MT , and Sears CL (2024). The microbial landscape of colorectal cancer. Nat Rev Microbiol 22, 240–254. 10.1038/s41579-023-00973-4.37794172
20. El Tekle G , and Garrett WS (2023). Bacteria in cancer initiation, promotion and progression. Nature Reviews Cancer 23, 600–618. 10.1038/s41568-023-00594-2.37400581
21. zur Hausen H (1991). Viruses in human cancers. Science 254, 1167–1173. 10.1126/science.1659743.1659743
22. Parsonnet J (2005). Clinician-discoverers--Marshall, Warren, and H. pylori. N Engl J Med 353, 2421–2423. 10.1056/NEJMp058270.16339090
23. Marshall B (2002). Helicobacter pylori: 20 years on. Clin Med (Lond) 2, 147–152. 10.7861/clinmedicine.2-2-147.11991099 PMC4952378
24. Fu K , Cheung AHK , Wong CC , Liu W , Zhou Y , Wang F , Huang P , Yuan K , Coker OO , Pan Y , (2024). Streptococcus anginosus promotes gastric inflammation, atrophy, and tumorigenesis in mice. Cell 187, 882–896 e817. 10.1016/j.cell.2024.01.004.38295787
25. Di Domenico EG , Cavallo I , Pontone M , Toma L , and Ensoli F (2017). Biofilm Producing Salmonella Typhi: Chronic Colonization and Development of Gallbladder Cancer. Int J Mol Sci 18. 10.3390/ijms18091887.PMC5618536 28858232
26. Sears CL , Geis AL , and Housseau F (2014). Bacteroides fragilis subverts mucosal biology: from symbiont to colon carcinogenesis. J Clin Invest 124, 4166–4172. 10.1172/JCI72334.25105360 PMC4191034
27. Drewes JL , Chen J , Markham NO , Knippel RJ , Domingue JC , Tam AJ , Chan JL , Kim L , McMann M , Stevens C , (2022). Human Colon Cancer-Derived Clostridioides difficile Strains Drive Colonic Tumorigenesis in Mice. Cancer Discov 12, 1873–1885. 10.1158/2159-8290.CD-21-1273.35678528 PMC9357196
28. Wilson MR , Jiang Y , Villalta PW , Stornetta A , Boudreau PD , Carra A , Brennan CA , Chun E , Ngo L , Samson LD , (2019). The human gut bacterial genotoxin colibactin alkylates DNA. Science 363. 10.1126/science.aar7785.PMC6407708 30765538
29. Xue M , Kim CS , Healy AR , Wernke KM , Wang Z , Frischling MC , Shine EE , Wang W , Herzon SB , and Crawford JM (2019). Structure elucidation of colibactin and its DNA cross-links. Science 365. 10.1126/science.aax2685.PMC6820679 31395743
30. Nougayrede JP , Homburg S , Taieb F , Boury M , Brzuszkiewicz E , Gottschalk G , Buchrieser C , Hacker J , Dobrindt U , and Oswald E (2006). Escherichia coli induces DNA double-strand breaks in eukaryotic cells. Science 313, 848–851. 10.1126/science.1127059.16902142
31. Tran SC , Bryant KN , and Cover TL (2024). The Helicobacter pylori cag pathogenicity island as a determinant of gastric cancer risk. Gut Microbes 16, 2314201. 10.1080/19490976.2024.2314201.38391242 PMC10896142
32. Lu R , Wu S , Zhang YG , Xia Y , Zhou Z , Kato I , Dong H , Bissonnette M , and Sun J (2016). Salmonella Protein AvrA Activates the STAT3 Signaling Pathway in Colon Cancer. Neoplasia 18, 307–316. 10.1016/j.neo.2016.04.001.27237322 PMC4887618
33. Song J , Gao X , and Galan JE (2013). Structure and function of the Salmonella Typhi chimaeric A(2)B(5) typhoid toxin. Nature 499, 350–354. 10.1038/nature12377.23842500 PMC4144355
34. Orrell KE , and Melnyk RA (2021). Large Clostridial Toxins: Mechanisms and Roles in Disease. Microbiol Mol Biol Rev 85, e0006421. 10.1128/MMBR.00064-21.34076506 PMC8483668
35. Putze J , Hennequin C , Nougayrede JP , Zhang W , Homburg S , Karch H , Bringer MA , Fayolle C , Carniel E , Rabsch W , (2009). Genetic structure and distribution of the colibactin genomic island among members of the family Enterobacteriaceae. Infect Immun 77, 4696–4703. 10.1128/IAI.00522-09.19720753 PMC2772509
36. Cao Y , Oh J , Xue M , Huh WJ , Wang J , Gonzalez-Hernandez JA , Rice TA , Martin AL , Song D , Crawford JM , (2022). Commensal microbiota from patients with inflammatory bowel disease produce genotoxic metabolites. Science 378, eabm3233. 10.1126/science.abm3233.36302024 PMC9993714
37. Brennan CA , and Garrett WS (2019). Fusobacterium nucleatum - symbiont, opportunist and oncobacterium. Nat Rev Microbiol 17, 156–166. 10.1038/s41579-018-0129-6.30546113 PMC6589823
38. Abed J , Emgard JE , Zamir G , Faroja M , Almogy G , Grenov A , Sol A , Naor R , Pikarsky E , Atlan KA , (2016). Fap2 Mediates Fusobacterium nucleatum Colorectal Adenocarcinoma Enrichment by Binding to Tumor-Expressed Gal-GalNAc. Cell Host Microbe 20, 215–225. 10.1016/j.chom.2016.07.006.27512904 PMC5465824
39. Zhang L , Leng XX , Qi J , Wang N , Han JX , Tao ZH , Zhuang ZY , Ren Y , Xie YL , Jiang SS , (2024). The adhesin RadD enhances Fusobacterium nucleatum tumour colonization and colorectal carcinogenesis. Nat Microbiol 9, 2292–2307. 10.1038/s41564-024-01784-w.39169124
40. Yang Y , Weng W , Peng J , Hong L , Yang L , Toiyama Y , Gao R , Liu M , Yin M , Pan C , (2017). Fusobacterium nucleatum Increases Proliferation of Colorectal Cancer Cells and Tumor Development in Mice by Activating Toll-Like Receptor 4 Signaling to Nuclear Factor-kappaB, and Up-regulating Expression of MicroRNA-21. Gastroenterology 152, 851–866 e824. 10.1053/j.gastro.2016.11.018.27876571 PMC5555435
41. Ternes D , Tsenkova M , Pozdeev VI , Meyers M , Koncina E , Atatri S , Schmitz M , Karta J , Schmoetten M , Heinken A , (2022). The gut microbial metabolite formate exacerbates colorectal cancer progression. Nat Metab 4, 458–475. 10.1038/s42255-022-00558-0.35437333 PMC9046088
42. Long X , Wong CC , Tong L , Chu ESH , Ho Szeto C , Go MYY , Coker OO , Chan AWH , Chan FKL , Sung JJY , and Yu J (2019). Peptostreptococcus anaerobius promotes colorectal carcinogenesis and modulates tumour immunity. Nat Microbiol 4, 2319–2330. 10.1038/s41564-019-0541-3.31501538
43. Manfredo Vieira S , Hiltensperger M , Kumar V , Zegarra-Ruiz D , Dehner C , Khan N , Costa FRC , Tiniakou E , Greiling T , Ruff W , (2018). Translocation of a gut pathobiont drives autoimmunity in mice and humans. Science 359, 1156–1161. 10.1126/science.aar7201.29590047 PMC5959731
44. Duan Y , Llorente C , Lang S , Brandl K , Chu H , Jiang L , White RC , Clarke TH , Nguyen K , Torralba M , (2019). Bacteriophage targeting of gut bacterium attenuates alcoholic liver disease. Nature 575, 505–511. 10.1038/s41586-019-1742-x.31723265 PMC6872939
45. Iida N , Mizukoshi E , Yamashita T , Yutani M , Seishima J , Wang Z , Arai K , Okada H , Yamashita T , Sakai Y , (2021). Chronic liver disease enables gut Enterococcus faecalis colonization to promote liver carcinogenesis. Nat Cancer 2, 1039–1054. 10.1038/s43018-021-00251-3.35121877
46. Wang X , Fang Y , Liang W , Cai Y , Wong CC , Wang J , Wang N , Lau HC , Jiao Y , Zhou X , (2025). Gut-liver translocation of pathogen Klebsiella pneumoniae promotes hepatocellular carcinoma in mice. Nat Microbiol 10, 169–184. 10.1038/s41564-024-01890-9.39747695 PMC11726454
47. Pernigoni N , Zagato E , Calcinotto A , Troiani M , Mestre RP , Cali B , Attanasio G , Troisi J , Minini M , Mosole S , (2021). Commensal bacteria promote endocrine resistance in prostate cancer through androgen biosynthesis. Science 374, 216–224. 10.1126/science.abf8403.34618582
48. Jin C , Lagoudas GK , Zhao C , Bullman S , Bhutkar A , Hu B , Ameh S , Sandel D , Liang XS , Mazzilli S , (2019). Commensal Microbiota Promote Lung Cancer Development via gammadelta T Cells. Cell 176, 998–1013 e1016. 10.1016/j.cell.2018.12.040.30712876 PMC6691977
49. Fu A , Yao B , Dong T , Chen Y , Yao J , Liu Y , Li H , Bai H , Liu X , Zhang Y , (2022). Tumor-resident intracellular microbiota promotes metastatic colonization in breast cancer. Cell 185, 1356–1372 e1326. 10.1016/j.cell.2022.02.027.35395179
50. Ma C , Han M , Heinrich B , Fu Q , Zhang Q , Sandhu M , Agdashian D , Terabe M , Berzofsky JA , Fako V , (2018). Gut microbiome-mediated bile acid metabolism regulates liver cancer via NKT cells. Science 360. 10.1126/science.aan5931.PMC6407885 29798856
51. Varanasi SK , Chen D , Liu Y , Johnson MA , Miller CM , Ganguly S , Lande K , LaPorta MA , Hoffmann FA , Mann TH , (2025). Bile acid synthesis impedes tumor-specific T cell responses during liver cancer. Science 387, 192–201. 10.1126/science.adl4100.39787217 PMC12166762
52. Fu T , Coulter S , Yoshihara E , Oh TG , Fang S , Cayabyab F , Zhu Q , Zhang T , Leblanc M , Liu S , (2019). FXR Regulates Intestinal Cancer Stem Cell Proliferation. Cell 176, 1098–1112 e1018. 10.1016/j.cell.2019.01.036.30794774 PMC6701863
53. Cong J , Liu P , Han Z , Ying W , Li C , Yang Y , Wang S , Yang J , Cao F , Shen J , (2024). Bile acids modified by the intestinal microbiota promote colorectal cancer growth by suppressing CD8+ T cell effector functions. Immunity 57, 876–889.e811. 10.1016/j.immuni.2024.02.014.38479384
54. Fu T , Huan T , Rahman G , Zhi H , Xu Z , Oh TG , Guo J , Coulter S , Tripathi A , Martino C , (2023). Paired microbiome and metabolome analyses associate bile acid changes with colorectal cancer progression. Cell Rep 42, 112997. 10.1016/j.celrep.2023.112997.37611587 PMC10903535
55. Sun L , Zhang Y , Cai J , Rimal B , Rocha ER , Coleman JP , Zhang C , Nichols RG , Luo Y , Kim B , (2023). Bile salt hydrolase in non-enterotoxigenic Bacteroides potentiates colorectal cancer. Nat Commun 14, 755. 10.1038/s41467-023-36089-9.36765047 PMC9918522
56. Maisonneuve C , Tsang DKL , Foerster EG , Robert LM , Mukherjee T , Prescott D , Tattoli I , Lemire P , Winer DA , Winer S , (2021). Nod1 promotes colorectal carcinogenesis by regulating the immunosuppressive functions of tumor-infiltrating myeloid cells. Cell Rep 34, 108677. 10.1016/j.celrep.2020.108677.33503439
57. Nejman D , Livyatan I , Fuks G , Gavert N , Zwang Y , Geller LT , Rotter-Maskowitz A , Weiser R , Mallel G , Gigi E , (2020). The human tumor microbiome is composed of tumor type-specific intracellular bacteria. Science 368, 973–980. 10.1126/science.aay9189.32467386 PMC7757858
58. Riquelme E , Zhang Y , Zhang L , Montiel M , Zoltan M , Dong W , Quesada P , Sahin I , Chandra V , San Lucas A , (2019). Tumor Microbiome Diversity and Composition Influence Pancreatic Cancer Outcomes. Cell 178, 795–806 e712. 10.1016/j.cell.2019.07.008.31398337 PMC7288240
59. Aykut B , Pushalkar S , Chen R , Li Q , Abengozar R , Kim JI , Shadaloey SA , Wu D , Preiss P , Verma N , (2019). The fungal mycobiome promotes pancreatic oncogenesis via activation of MBL. Nature 574, 264–267. 10.1038/s41586-019-1608-2.31578522 PMC6858566
60. Narunsky-Haziza L , Sepich-Poore GD , Livyatan I , Asraf O , Martino C , Nejman D , Gavert N , Stajich JE , Amit G , Gonzalez A , (2022). Pan-cancer analyses reveal cancer-type-specific fungal ecologies and bacteriome interactions. Cell 185, 3789–3806 e3717. 10.1016/j.cell.2022.09.005.36179670 PMC9567272
61. Alam A , Levanduski E , Denz P , Villavicencio HS , Bhatta M , Alhorebi L , Zhang Y , Gomez EC , Morreale B , Senchanthisai S , (2022). Fungal mycobiome drives IL-33 secretion and type 2 immunity in pancreatic cancer. Cancer Cell 40, 153–167 e111. 10.1016/j.ccell.2022.01.003.35120601 PMC8847236
62. Dohlman AB , Klug J , Mesko M , Gao IH , Lipkin SM , Shen X , and Iliev ID (2022). A pan-cancer mycobiome analysis reveals fungal involvement in gastrointestinal and lung tumors. Cell 185, 3807–3822 e3812. 10.1016/j.cell.2022.09.015.36179671 PMC9564002
63. Liu NN , Yi CX , Wei LQ , Zhou JA , Jiang T , Hu CC , Wang L , Wang YY , Zou Y , Zhao YK , (2023). The intratumor mycobiome promotes lung cancer progression via myeloid-derived suppressor cells. Cancer Cell 41, 1927–1944 e1929. 10.1016/j.ccell.2023.08.012.37738973
64. Nakatsu G , Andreeva N , MacDonald MH , and Garrett WS (2024). Interactions between diet and gut microbiota in cancer. Nat Microbiol 9, 1644–1654. 10.1038/s41564-024-01736-4.38907007
65. Rooks MG , and Garrett WS (2016). Gut microbiota, metabolites and host immunity. Nat Rev Immunol 16, 341–352. 10.1038/nri.2016.42.27231050 PMC5541232
66. Singh N , Gurav A , Sivaprakasam S , Brady E , Padia R , Shi H , Thangaraju M , Prasad PD , Manicassamy S , Munn DH , (2014). Activation of Gpr109a, receptor for niacin and the commensal metabolite butyrate, suppresses colonic inflammation and carcinogenesis. Immunity 40, 128–139. 10.1016/j.immuni.2013.12.007.24412617 PMC4305274
67. Bell HN , Rebernick RJ , Goyert J , Singhal R , Kuljanin M , Kerk SA , Huang W , Das NK , Andren A , Solanki S , (2022). Reuterin in the healthy gut microbiome suppresses colorectal cancer growth through altering redox balance. Cancer Cell 40, 185–200 e186. 10.1016/j.ccell.2021.12.001.34951957 PMC8847337
68. Montalban-Arques A , Katkeviciute E , Busenhart P , Bircher A , Wirbel J , Zeller G , Morsy Y , Borsig L , Glaus Garzon JF , Muller A , (2021). Commensal Clostridiales strains mediate effective anti-cancer immune response against solid tumors. Cell Host Microbe 29, 1573–1588 e1577. 10.1016/j.chom.2021.08.001.34453895
69. Li Q , Chan H , Liu WX , Liu CA , Zhou Y , Huang D , Wang X , Li X , Xie C , Liu WY , (2023). Carnobacterium maltaromaticum boosts intestinal vitamin D production to suppress colorectal cancer in female mice. Cancer Cell 41, 1450–1465 e1458. 10.1016/j.ccell.2023.06.011.37478851
70. Sepich-Poore GD , McDonald D , Kopylova E , Guccione C , Zhu Q , Austin G , Carpenter C , Fraraccio S , Wandro S , Kosciolek T , (2024). Robustness of cancer microbiome signals over a broad range of methodological variation. Oncogene 43, 1127–1148. 10.1038/s41388-024-02974-w.38396294 PMC10997506
71. Dohlman AB , Arguijo Mendoza D , Ding S , Gao M , Dressman H , Iliev ID , Lipkin SM , and Shen X (2021). The cancer microbiome atlas: a pan-cancer comparative analysis to distinguish tissue-resident microbiota from contaminants. Cell Host Microbe 29, 281–298 e285. 10.1016/j.chom.2020.12.001.33382980 PMC7878430
72. Austin GI , Park H , Meydan Y , Seeram D , Sezin T , Lou YC , Firek BA , Morowitz MJ , Banfield JF , Christiano AM , (2023). Contamination source modeling with SCRuB improves cancer phenotype prediction from microbiome data. Nat Biotechnol 41, 1820–1828. 10.1038/s41587-023-01696-w.36928429 PMC10504420
73. Ge Y , Lu J , Puiu D , Revsine M , and Salzberg SL (2024). Comprehensive analysis of microbial content in whole-genome sequencing samples from The Cancer Genome Atlas project. bioRxiv. 10.1101/2024.05.24.595788.
74. Gihawi A , Ge Y , Lu J , Puiu D , Xu A , Cooper CS , Brewer DS , Pertea M , and Salzberg SL (2023). Major data analysis errors invalidate cancer microbiome findings. Mbio 14, e0160723. 10.1128/mbio.01607-23.37811944 PMC10653788
75. Koppel N , Maini Rekdal V , and Balskus EP (2017). Chemical transformation of xenobiotics by the human gut microbiota. Science 356. 10.1126/science.aag2770.PMC5534341 28642381
76. Spanogiannopoulos P , Bess EN , Carmody RN , and Turnbaugh PJ (2016). The microbial pharmacists within us: a metagenomic view of xenobiotic metabolism. Nat Rev Microbiol 14, 273–287. 10.1038/nrmicro.2016.17.26972811 PMC5243131
77. Zimmermann M , Zimmermann-Kogadeeva M , Wegmann R , and Goodman AL (2019). Mapping human microbiome drug metabolism by gut bacteria and their genes. Nature 570, 462–467. 10.1038/s41586-019-1291-3.31158845 PMC6597290
78. Zimmermann M , Zimmermann-Kogadeeva M , Wegmann R , and Goodman AL (2019). Separating host and microbiome contributions to drug pharmacokinetics and toxicity. Science 363. 10.1126/science.aat9931.PMC6533120 30733391
79. Roje B , Zhang B , Mastrorilli E , Kovacic A , Susak L , Ljubenkov I , Cosic E , Vilovic K , Mestrovic A , Vukovac EL , (2024). Gut microbiota carcinogen metabolism causes distal tissue tumours. Nature 632, 1137–1144. 10.1038/s41586-024-07754-w.39085612 PMC11358042
80. Wallace BD , Wang H , Lane KT , Scott JE , Orans J , Koo JS , Venkatesh M , Jobin C , Yeh LA , Mani S , and Redinbo MR (2010). Alleviating cancer drug toxicity by inhibiting a bacterial enzyme. Science 330, 831–835. 10.1126/science.1191175.21051639 PMC3110694
81. Geller LT , Barzily-Rokni M , Danino T , Jonas OH , Shental N , Nejman D , Gavert N , Zwang Y , Cooper ZA , Shee K , (2017). Potential role of intratumor bacteria in mediating tumor resistance to the chemotherapeutic drug gemcitabine. Science 357, 1156–1160. 10.1126/science.aah5043.28912244 PMC5727343
82. Viaud S , Saccheri F , Mignot G , Yamazaki T , Daillere R , Hannani D , Enot DP , Pfirschke C , Engblom C , Pittet MJ , (2013). The intestinal microbiota modulates the anticancer immune effects of cyclophosphamide. Science 342, 971–976. 10.1126/science.1240537.24264990 PMC4048947
83. Daillere R , Vetizou M , Waldschmitt N , Yamazaki T , Isnard C , Poirier-Colame V , Duong CPM , Flament C , Lepage P , Roberti MP , (2016). Enterococcus hirae and Barnesiella intestinihominis Facilitate Cyclophosphamide-Induced Therapeutic Immunomodulatory Effects. Immunity 45, 931–943. 10.1016/j.immuni.2016.09.009.27717798
84. Iida N , Dzutsev A , Stewart CA , Smith L , Bouladoux N , Weingarten RA , Molina DA , Salcedo R , Back T , Cramer S , (2013). Commensal bacteria control cancer response to therapy by modulating the tumor microenvironment. Science 342, 967–970. 10.1126/science.1240527.24264989 PMC6709532
85. Yu T , Guo F , Yu Y , Sun T , Ma D , Han J , Qian Y , Kryczek I , Sun D , Nagarsheth N , (2017). Fusobacterium nucleatum Promotes Chemoresistance to Colorectal Cancer by Modulating Autophagy. Cell 170, 548–563 e516. 10.1016/j.cell.2017.07.008.28753429 PMC5767127
86. Colbert LE , El Alam MB , Wang R , Karpinets T , Lo D , Lynn EJ , Harris TA , Elnaggar JH , Yoshida-Court K , Tomasic K , (2023). Tumor-resident Lactobacillus iners confer chemoradiation resistance through lactate-induced metabolic rewiring. Cancer Cell 41, 1945–1962 e1911. 10.1016/j.ccell.2023.09.012.37863066 PMC10841640
87. Shiao SL , Kershaw KM , Limon JJ , You S , Yoon J , Ko EY , Guarnerio J , Potdar AA , McGovern DPB , Bose S , (2021). Commensal bacteria and fungi differentially regulate tumor responses to radiation therapy. Cancer Cell 39, 1202–1213 e1206. 10.1016/j.ccell.2021.07.002.34329585 PMC8830498
88. Tintelnot J , Xu Y , Lesker TR , Schönlein M , Konczalla L , Giannou AD , Pelczar P , Kylies D , Puelles VG , Bielecka AA , (2023). Microbiota-derived 3-IAA influences chemotherapy efficacy in pancreatic cancer. Nature 615, 168–+. 10.1038/s41586-023-05728-y.36813961 PMC9977685
89. Chamoto K , Yaguchi T , Tajima M , and Honjo T (2023). Insights from a 30-year journey: function, regulation and therapeutic modulation of PD1. Nat Rev Immunol 23, 682–695. 10.1038/s41577-023-00867-9.37185300
90. Sharma P , Goswami S , Raychaudhuri D , Siddiqui BA , Singh P , Nagarajan A , Liu J , Subudhi SK , Poon C , Gant KL , (2023). Immune checkpoint therapy-current perspectives and future directions. Cell 186, 1652–1669. 10.1016/j.cell.2023.03.006.37059068
91. Ribas A , and Wolchok JD (2018). Cancer immunotherapy using checkpoint blockade. Science 359, 1350–1355. 10.1126/science.aar4060.29567705 PMC7391259
92. June CH , O’Connor RS , Kawalekar OU , Ghassemi S , and Milone MC (2018). CAR T cell immunotherapy for human cancer. Science 359, 1361–1365. 10.1126/science.aar6711.29567707
93. Sharma P , Hu-Lieskovan S , Wargo JA , and Ribas A (2017). Primary, adaptive, and acquired resistance to cancer immunotherapy. Cell 168, 707–723. 10.1016/j.cell.2017.01.017.28187290 PMC5391692
94. Paul S , Konig MF , Pardoll DM , Bettegowda C , Papadopoulos N , Wright KM , Gabelli SB , Ho M , van Elsas A , and Zhou S (2024). Cancer therapy with antibodies. Nat Rev Cancer 24, 399–426. 10.1038/s41568-024-00690-x.38740967 PMC11180426
95. Feng M , Jiang W , Kim BYS , Zhang CC , Fu YX , and Weissman IL (2019). Phagocytosis checkpoints as new targets for cancer immunotherapy. Nat Rev Cancer 19, 568–586. 10.1038/s41568-019-0183-z.31462760 PMC7002027
96. Vétizou M , Pitt JM , Daillère R , Lepage P , Waldschmitt N , Flament C , Rusakiewicz S , Routy B , Roberti MP , Duong CPM , (2015). Anticancer immunotherapy by CTLA-4 blockade relies on the gut microbiota. Science 350, 1079–+. 10.1126/science.aad1329.26541610 PMC4721659
97. Sivan A , Corrales L , Hubert N , Williams JB , Aquino-Michaels K , Earley ZM , Benyamin FW , Lei YM , Jabri B , Alegre ML , (2015). Commensal Bifidobacterium promotes antitumor immunity and facilitates anti-PD-L1 efficacy. Science 350, 1084–1089. 10.1126/science.aac4255.26541606 PMC4873287
98. Routy B , Le Chatelier E , Derosa L , Duong CPM , Alou MT , Daillere R , Fluckiger A , Messaoudene M , Rauber C , Roberti MP , (2018). Gut microbiome influences efficacy of PD-1-based immunotherapy against epithelial tumors. Science 359, 91–97. 10.1126/science.aan3706.29097494
99. Matson V , Fessler J , Bao R , Chongsuwat T , Zha Y , Alegre ML , Luke JJ , and Gajewski TF (2018). The commensal microbiome is associated with anti-PD-1 efficacy in metastatic melanoma patients. Science 359, 104–108. 10.1126/science.aao3290.29302014 PMC6707353
100. Gopalakrishnan V , Spencer CN , Nezi L , Reuben A , Andrews MC , Karpinets TV , Prieto PA , Vicente D , Hoffman K , Wei SC , (2018). Gut microbiome modulates response to anti-PD-1 immunotherapy in melanoma patients. Science 359, 97–103. 10.1126/science.aan4236.29097493 PMC5827966
101. Brown WR (2014). Fecal microbiota transplantation in treating Clostridium difficile infection. J Dig Dis 15, 405–408. 10.1111/1751-2980.12160.24825534
102. Gough E , Shaikh H , and Manges AR (2011). Systematic review of intestinal microbiota transplantation (fecal bacteriotherapy) for recurrent Clostridium difficile infection. Clin Infect Dis 53, 994–1002. 10.1093/cid/cir632.22002980
103. Baruch EN , Youngster I , Ben-Betzalel G , Ortenberg R , Lahat A , Katz L , Adler K , Dick-Necula D , Raskin S , Bloch N , (2021). Fecal microbiota transplant promotes response in immunotherapy-refractory melanoma patients. Science 371, 602–609. 10.1126/science.abb5920.33303685
104. Davar D , Dzutsev AK , McCulloch JA , Rodrigues RR , Chauvin JM , Morrison RM , Deblasio RN , Menna C , Ding Q , Pagliano O , (2021). Fecal microbiota transplant overcomes resistance to anti-PD-1 therapy in melanoma patients. Science 371, 595–602. 10.1126/science.abf3363.33542131 PMC8097968
105. Wang Y , Wiesnoski DH , Helmink BA , Gopalakrishnan V , Choi K , DuPont HL , Jiang ZD , Abu-Sbeih H , Sanchez CA , Chang CC , (2018). Fecal microbiota transplantation for refractory immune checkpoint inhibitor-associated colitis. Nat Med 24, 1804–1808. 10.1038/s41591-018-0238-9.30420754 PMC6322556
106. Routy B , Lenehan JG , Miller WH Jr. , Jamal R , Messaoudene M , Daisley BA , Hes C , Al KF , Martinez-Gili L , Puncochar M , (2023). Fecal microbiota transplantation plus anti-PD-1 immunotherapy in advanced melanoma: a phase I trial. Nat Med 29, 2121–2132. 10.1038/s41591-023-02453-x.37414899
107. Shi Y , Zheng W , Yang K , Harris KG , Ni K , Xue L , Lin W , Chang EB , Weichselbaum RR , and Fu Y-X (2020). Intratumoral accumulation of gut microbiota facilitates CD47-based immunotherapy via STING signaling. Journal of Experimental Medicine 217, e20192282–e20192282. 10.1084/jem.20192282.32142585 PMC7201921
108. Tanoue T , Morita S , Plichta DR , Skelly AN , Suda W , Sugiura Y , Narushima S , Vlamakis H , Motoo I , Sugita K , (2019). A defined commensal consortium elicits CD8 T cells and anti-cancer immunity. Nature 565, 600–605. 10.1038/s41586-019-0878-z.30675064
109. Smith M , Dai A , Ghilardi G , Amelsberg KV , Devlin SM , Pajarillo R , Slingerland JB , Beghi S , Herrera PS , Giardina P , (2022). Gut microbiome correlates of response and toxicity following anti-CD19 CAR T cell therapy. Nat Med 28, 713–723. 10.1038/s41591-022-01702-9.35288695 PMC9434490
110. Hu Y , Li J , Ni F , Yang Z , Gui X , Bao Z , Zhao H , Wei G , Wang Y , Zhang M , (2022). CAR-T cell therapy-related cytokine release syndrome and therapeutic response is modulated by the gut microbiome in hematologic malignancies. Nat Commun 13, 5313. 10.1038/s41467-022-32960-3.36085303 PMC9461447
111. Uribe-Herranz M , Beghi S , Ruella M , Parvathaneni K , Salaris S , Kostopoulos N , George SS , Pierini S , Krimitza E , Costabile F , (2023). Modulation of the gut microbiota engages antigen cross-presentation to enhance antitumor effects of CAR T cell immunotherapy. Mol Ther 31, 686–700. 10.1016/j.ymthe.2023.01.012.36641624 PMC10014349
112. Stein-Thoeringer CK , Saini NY , Zamir E , Blumenberg V , Schubert ML , Mor U , Fante MA , Schmidt S , Hayase E , Hayase T , (2023). A non-antibiotic-disrupted gut microbiome is associated with clinical responses to CD19-CAR-T cell cancer immunotherapy. Nat Med 29, 906–916. 10.1038/s41591-023-02234-6.36914893 PMC10121864
113. Zhu X , Hu M , Huang X , Li L , Lin X , Shao X , Li J , Du X , Zhang X , Sun R , (2025). Interplay between gut microbial communities and metabolites modulates pan-cancer immunotherapy responses. Cell Metab. 10.1016/j.cmet.2024.12.013.39909032
114. Derosa L , Routy B , Thomas AM , Iebba V , Zalcman G , Friard S , Mazieres J , Audigier-Valette C , Moro-Sibilot D , Goldwasser F , (2022). Intestinal Akkermansia muciniphila predicts clinical response to PD-1 blockade in patients with advanced non-small-cell lung cancer. Nat Med 28, 315–324. 10.1038/s41591-021-01655-5.35115705 PMC9330544
115. Helmink BA , Khan MAW , Hermann A , Gopalakrishnan V , and Wargo JA (2019). The microbiome, cancer, and cancer therapy. Nat Med 25, 377–388. 10.1038/s41591-019-0377-7.30842679
116. Griffin ME , and Hang HC (2022). Microbial mechanisms to improve immune checkpoint blockade responsiveness. Neoplasia 31, 100818. 10.1016/j.neo.2022.100818.35816968 PMC9284443
117. Lee KA , Thomas AM , Bolte LA , Bjork JR , de Ruijter LK , Armanini F , Asnicar F , Blanco-Miguez A , Board R , Calbet-Llopart N , (2022). Cross-cohort gut microbiome associations with immune checkpoint inhibitor response in advanced melanoma. Nat Med 28, 535–544. 10.1038/s41591-022-01695-5.35228751 PMC8938272
118. McCulloch JA , Davar D , Rodrigues RR , Badger JH , Fang JR , Cole AM , Balaji AK , Vetizou M , Prescott SM , Fernandes MR , (2022). Intestinal microbiota signatures of clinical response and immune-related adverse events in melanoma patients treated with anti-PD-1. Nat Med 28, 545–556. 10.1038/s41591-022-01698-2.35228752 PMC10246505
119. Bjork JR , Bolte LA , Maltez Thomas A , Lee KA , Rossi N , Wind TT , Smit LM , Armanini F , Asnicar F , Blanco-Miguez A , (2024). Longitudinal gut microbiome changes in immune checkpoint blockade-treated advanced melanoma. Nat Med 30, 785–796. 10.1038/s41591-024-02803-3.38365950 PMC10957474
120. Derosa L , Iebba V , Silva CAC , Piccinno G , Wu G , Lordello L , Routy B , Zhao N , Thelemaque C , Birebent R , (2024). Custom scoring based on ecological topology of gut microbiota associated with cancer immunotherapy outcome. Cell 187, 3373–3389 e3316. 10.1016/j.cell.2024.05.029.38906102
121. Derrien M , Collado MC , Ben-Amor K , Salminen S , and de Vos WM (2008). The Mucin degrader Akkermansia muciniphila is an abundant resident of the human intestinal tract. Appl Environ Microbiol 74, 1646–1648. 10.1128/AEM.01226-07.18083887 PMC2258631
122. Cani PD , Depommier C , Derrien M , Everard A , and de Vos WM (2022). Akkermansia muciniphila: paradigm for next-generation beneficial microorganisms. Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol 19, 625–637. 10.1038/s41575-022-00631-9.35641786
123. Everard A , Lazarevic V , Derrien M , Girard M , Muccioli GG , Neyrinck AM , Possemiers S , Van Holle A , Francois P , de Vos WM , (2011). Responses of gut microbiota and glucose and lipid metabolism to prebiotics in genetic obese and diet-induced leptin-resistant mice. Diabetes 60, 2775–2786. 10.2337/db11-0227.21933985 PMC3198091
124. Everard A , Belzer C , Geurts L , Ouwerkerk JP , Druart C , Bindels LB , Guiot Y , Derrien M , Muccioli GG , Delzenne NM , (2013). Cross-talk between Akkermansia muciniphila and intestinal epithelium controls diet-induced obesity. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 110, 9066–9071. 10.1073/pnas.1219451110.23671105 PMC3670398
125. von Schwartzenberg RJ , Bisanz JE , Lyalina S , Spanogiannopoulos P , Ang QY , Cai J , Dickmann S , Friedrich M , Liu SY , Collins SL , (2021). Caloric restriction disrupts the microbiota and colonization resistance. Nature 595, 272–277. 10.1038/s41586-021-03663-4.34163067 PMC8959578
126. Wu H , Esteve E , Tremaroli V , Khan MT , Caesar R , Manneras-Holm L , Stahlman M , Olsson LM , Serino M , Planas-Felix M , (2017). Metformin alters the gut microbiome of individuals with treatment-naive type 2 diabetes, contributing to the therapeutic effects of the drug. Nat Med 23, 850–858. 10.1038/nm.4345.28530702
127. Zheng M , Han R , Yuan Y , Xing Y , Zhang W , Sun Z , Liu Y , Li J , and Mao T (2022). The role of Akkermansia muciniphila in inflammatory bowel disease: Current knowledge and perspectives. Front Immunol 13, 1089600. 10.3389/fimmu.2022.1089600.36685588 PMC9853388
128. Ansaldo E , Slayden LC , Ching KL , Koch MA , Wolf NK , Plichta DR , Brown EM , Graham DB , Xavier RJ , Moon JJ , and Barton GM (2019). Akkermansia muciniphila induces intestinal adaptive immune responses during homeostasis. Science 364, 1179–1184. 10.1126/science.aaw7479.31221858 PMC6645389
129. Liu Q , Lu W , Tian F , Zhao J , Zhang H , Hong K , and Yu L (2021). Akkermansia muciniphila Exerts Strain-Specific Effects on DSS-Induced Ulcerative Colitis in Mice. Front Cell Infect Microbiol 11, 698914. 10.3389/fcimb.2021.698914.34422681 PMC8371549
130. Kang CS , Ban M , Choi EJ , Moon HG , Jeon JS , Kim DK , Park SK , Jeon SG , Roh TY , Myung SJ , (2013). Extracellular vesicles derived from gut microbiota, especially Akkermansia muciniphila, protect the progression of dextran sulfate sodium-induced colitis. PLoS One 8, e76520. 10.1371/journal.pone.0076520.24204633 PMC3811976
131. Plovier H , Everard A , Druart C , Depommier C , Van Hul M , Geurts L , Chilloux J , Ottman N , Duparc T , Lichtenstein L , (2017). A purified membrane protein from Akkermansia muciniphila or the pasteurized bacterium improves metabolism in obese and diabetic mice. Nat Med 23, 107–113. 10.1038/nm.4236.27892954
132. Wang L , Tang L , Feng Y , Zhao S , Han M , Zhang C , Yuan G , Zhu J , Cao S , Wu Q , (2020). A purified membrane protein from Akkermansia muciniphila or the pasteurised bacterium blunts colitis associated tumourigenesis by modulation of CD8(+) T cells in mice. Gut 69, 1988–1997. 10.1136/gutjnl-2019-320105.32169907 PMC7569398
133. Bae M , Cassilly CD , Liu X , Park SM , Tusi BK , Chen X , Kwon J , Filipcik P , Bolze AS , Liu Z , (2022). Akkermansia muciniphila phospholipid induces homeostatic immune responses. Nature 608, 168–173. 10.1038/s41586-022-04985-7.35896748 PMC9328018
134. Rakoff-Nahoum S , and Medzhitov R (2009). Toll-like receptors and cancer. Nat Rev Cancer 9, 57–63. 10.1038/nrc2541.19052556
135. Wang J , Zhang J , Wang J , Hu X , Ouyang L , and Wang Y (2023). Small-Molecule Modulators Targeting Toll-like Receptors for Potential Anticancer Therapeutics. J Med Chem 66, 6437–6462. 10.1021/acs.jmedchem.2c01655.37163340
136. Lam KC , Araya RE , Huang A , Chen Q , Di Modica M , Rodrigues RR , Lopes A , Johnson SB , Schwarz B , Bohrnsen E , (2021). Microbiota triggers STING-type I IFN-dependent monocyte reprogramming of the tumor microenvironment. Cell 184, 5338–5356 e5321. 10.1016/j.cell.2021.09.019.34624222 PMC8650838
137. Samson N , and Ablasser A (2022). The cGAS-STING pathway and cancer. Nat Cancer 3, 1452–1463. 10.1038/s43018-022-00468-w.36510011
138. Chin EN , Sulpizio A , and Lairson LL (2023). Targeting STING to promote antitumor immunity. Trends Cell Biol 33, 189–203. 10.1016/j.tcb.2022.06.010.35931610
139. Davey LE , Malkus PN , Villa M , Dolat L , Holmes ZC , Letourneau J , Ansaldo E , David LA , Barton GM , and Valdivia RH (2023). A genetic system for Akkermansia muciniphila reveals a role for mucin foraging in gut colonization and host sterol biosynthesis gene expression. Nat Microbiol 8, 1450–1467. 10.1038/s41564-023-01407-w.37337046 PMC11741908
140. Salyers AA (1984). Bacteroides of the human lower intestinal tract. Annu Rev Microbiol 38, 293–313. 10.1146/annurev.mi.38.100184.001453.6388494
141. Mazmanian SK , Round JL , and Kasper DL (2008). A microbial symbiosis factor prevents intestinal inflammatory disease. Nature 453, 620–625. 10.1038/nature07008.18509436
142. Round JL , Lee SM , Li J , Tran G , Jabri B , Chatila TA , and Mazmanian SK (2011). The Toll-like receptor 2 pathway establishes colonization by a commensal of the human microbiota. Science 332, 974–977. 10.1126/science.1206095.21512004 PMC3164325
143. Mazmanian SK , Liu CH , Tzianabos AO , and Kasper DL (2005). An immunomodulatory molecule of symbiotic bacteria directs maturation of the host immune system. Cell 122, 107–118. 10.1016/j.cell.2005.05.007.16009137
144. Giampazolias E , Pereira da Costa M , Lam KC , Lim KHJ , Cardoso A , Piot C , Chakravarty P , Blasche S , Patel S , Biram A , (2024). Vitamin D regulates microbiome-dependent cancer immunity. Science 384, 428–437. 10.1126/science.adh7954.38662827 PMC7615937
145. Derrien M , Turroni F , Ventura M , and van Sinderen D (2022). Insights into endogenous Bifidobacterium species in the human gut microbiota during adulthood. Trends Microbiol 30, 940–947. 10.1016/j.tim.2022.04.004.35577716
146. Ku S , Haque MA , Jang MJ , Ahn J , Choe D , Jeon JI , and Park MS (2024). The role of Bifidobacterium in longevity and the future of probiotics. Food Sci Biotechnol 33, 2097–2110. 10.1007/s10068-024-01631-y.39130652 PMC11315853
147. Shi Y , Zheng W , Yang K , Harris KG , Ni K , Xue L , Lin W , Chang EB , Weichselbaum RR , and Fu YX (2020). Intratumoral accumulation of gut microbiota facilitates CD47-based immunotherapy via STING signaling. J Exp Med 217. 10.1084/jem.20192282.PMC7201921 32142585
148. Bessell CA , Isser A , Havel JJ , Lee S , Bell DR , Hickey JW , Chaisawangwong W , Glick Bieler J , Srivastava R , Kuo F , (2020). Commensal bacteria stimulate antitumor responses via T cell cross-reactivity. JCI Insight 5. 10.1172/jci.insight.135597.PMC7205429 32324171
149. Mager LF , Burkhard R , Pett N , Cooke NCA , Brown K , Ramay H , Paik S , Stagg J , Groves RA , Gallo M , (2020). Microbiome-derived inosine modulates response to checkpoint inhibitor immunotherapy. Science 369, 1481–1489. 10.1126/science.abc3421.32792462
150. Klysz DD , Fowler C , Malipatlolla M , Stuani L , Freitas KA , Chen Y , Meier S , Daniel B , Sandor K , Xu P , (2024). Inosine induces stemness features in CAR-T cells and enhances potency. Cancer Cell 42, 266–282 e268. 10.1016/j.ccell.2024.01.002.38278150 PMC10923096
151. Ueki H , Kitagawa K , Kato M , Yanase S , Okamura Y , Bando Y , Hara T , Terakawa T , Furukawa J , Nakano Y , (2023). An oral cancer vaccine using Bifidobacterium vector augments combination of anti-PD-1 and anti-CTLA-4 antibodies in mouse renal cell carcinoma model. Sci Rep 13, 9994. 10.1038/s41598-023-37234-6.37340017 PMC10281997
152. Lee S. h. , Cho S. y. , Yoon Y , Park C , Sohn J , Jeong J. j. , Jeon B. n. , Jang M , An C , Lee S , (2021). Bifidobacterium bifidum strains synergize with immune checkpoint inhibitors to reduce tumour burden in mice. Nature Microbiology 6. 10.1038/s41564-020-00831-6.33432149
153. Zuo F , and Marcotte H (2021). Advancing mechanistic understanding and bioengineering of probiotic lactobacilli and bifidobacteria by genome editing. Curr Opin Biotechnol 70, 75–82. 10.1016/j.copbio.2020.12.015.33445135
154. Wells CL , and Wilkins TD (1996). Clostridia: Sporeforming Anaerobic Bacilli. In Medical Microbiology, Baron S , ed.21413315
155. Shen A (2020). Clostridioides difficile Spore Formation and Germination: New Insights and Opportunities for Intervention. Annu Rev Microbiol 74, 545–566. 10.1146/annurev-micro-011320-011321.32905755
156. Dong M , Masuyer G , and Stenmark P (2019). Botulinum and Tetanus Neurotoxins. Annu Rev Biochem 88, 811–837. 10.1146/annurev-biochem-013118-111654.30388027 PMC7539302
157. Huang T , Li S , Li G , Tian Y , Wang H , Shi L , Perez-Cordon G , Mao L , Wang X , Wang J , and Feng H (2014). Utility of Clostridium difficile toxin B for inducing anti-tumor immunity. PLoS One 9, e110826. 10.1371/journal.pone.0110826.25340750 PMC4207755
158. Agrawal N , Bettegowda C , Cheong I , Geschwind JF , Drake CG , Hipkiss EL , Tatsumi M , Dang LH , Diaz LA Jr. , Pomper M , (2004). Bacteriolytic therapy can generate a potent immune response against experimental tumors. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 101, 15172–15177. 10.1073/pnas.0406242101.15471990 PMC523456
159. Bettegowda C , Dang LH , Abrams R , Huso DL , Dillehay L , Cheong I , Agrawal N , Borzillary S , McCaffery JM , Watson EL , (2003). Overcoming the hypoxic barrier to radiation therapy with anaerobic bacteria. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 100, 15083–15088. 10.1073/pnas.2036598100.14657371 PMC299912
160. Janku F , Zhang HH , Pezeshki A , Goel S , Murthy R , Wang-Gillam A , Shepard DR , Helgason T , Masters T , Hong DS , (2021). Intratumoral Injection of Clostridium novyi-NT Spores in Patients with Treatment-refractory Advanced Solid Tumors. Clin Cancer Res 27, 96–106. 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-20-2065.33046513
161. Shaikh FY , Gills JJ , Mohammad F , White JR , Stevens CM , Ding H , Fu J , Tam A , Blosser RL , Domingue JC , (2022). Murine fecal microbiota transfer models selectively colonize human microbes and reveal transcriptional programs associated with response to neoadjuvant checkpoint inhibitors. Cancer Immunol Immunother 71, 2405–2420. 10.1007/s00262-022-03169-6.35217892 PMC9411268
162. Tomita Y , Goto Y , Sakata S , Imamura K , Minemura A , Oka K , Hayashi A , Jodai T , Akaike K , Anai M , (2022). Clostridium butyricum therapy restores the decreased efficacy of immune checkpoint blockade in lung cancer patients receiving proton pump inhibitors. Oncoimmunology 11, 2081010. 10.1080/2162402X.2022.2081010.35655708 PMC9154751
163. Guo CJ , Allen BM , Hiam KJ , Dodd D , Van Treuren W , Higginbottom S , Nagashima K , Fischer CR , Sonnenburg JL , Spitzer MH , and Fischbach MA (2019). Depletion of microbiome-derived molecules in the host using Clostridium genetics. Science 366. 10.1126/science.aav1282.PMC7141153 31831639
164. Lebreton F , Manson AL , Saavedra JT , Straub TJ , Earl AM , and Gilmore MS (2017). Tracing the Enterococci from Paleozoic Origins to the Hospital. Cell 169, 849–861 e813. 10.1016/j.cell.2017.04.027.28502769 PMC5499534
165. Van Tyne D , and Gilmore MS (2014). Friend turned foe: evolution of enterococcal virulence and antibiotic resistance. Annu Rev Microbiol 68, 337–356. 10.1146/annurev-micro-091213-113003.25002090 PMC4384341
166. Hanchi H , Mottawea W , Sebei K , and Hammami R (2018). The Genus Enterococcus: Between Probiotic Potential and Safety Concerns-An Update. Front Microbiol 9, 1791. 10.3389/fmicb.2018.01791.30123208 PMC6085487
167. Arias CA , and Murray BE (2012). The rise of the Enterococcus: beyond vancomycin resistance. Nat Rev Microbiol 10, 266–278. 10.1038/nrmicro2761.22421879 PMC3621121
168. Fiore E , Van Tyne D , and Gilmore MS (2019). Pathogenicity of Enterococci. Microbiol Spectr 7. 10.1128/microbiolspec.GPP3-0053-2018.PMC6629438 31298205
169. Barnett MP , McNabb WC , Cookson AL , Zhu S , Davy M , Knoch B , Nones K , Hodgkinson AJ , and Roy NC (2010). Changes in colon gene expression associated with increased colon inflammation in interleukin-10 gene-deficient mice inoculated with Enterococcus species. BMC Immunol 11, 39. 10.1186/1471-2172-11-39.20630110 PMC2912833
170. Seishima J , Iida N , Kitamura K , Yutani M , Wang Z , Seki A , Yamashita T , Sakai Y , Honda M , Yamashita T , (2019). Gut-derived Enterococcus faecium from ulcerative colitis patients promotes colitis in a genetically susceptible mouse host. Genome Biol 20, 252. 10.1186/s13059-019-1879-9.31767028 PMC6876129
171. Wei Y , Palacios Araya D , and Palmer KL (2024). Enterococcus faecium: evolution, adaptation, pathogenesis and emerging therapeutics. Nat Rev Microbiol. 10.1038/s41579-024-01058-6.PMC12147861 38890478
172. Stein-Thoeringer CK , Nichols KB , Lazrak A , Docampo MD , Slingerland AE , Slingerland JB , Clurman AG , Armijo G , Gomes ALC , Shono Y , (2019). Lactose drives Enterococcus expansion to promote graft-versus-host disease. Science 366, 1143–1149. 10.1126/science.aax3760.31780560 PMC7003985
173. Zhang S , Lebreton F , Mansfield MJ , Miyashita SI , Zhang J , Schwartzman JA , Tao L , Masuyer G , Martinez-Carranza M , Stenmark P , (2018). Identification of a Botulinum Neurotoxin-like Toxin in a Commensal Strain of Enterococcus faecium. Cell Host Microbe 23, 169–176 e166. 10.1016/j.chom.2017.12.018.29396040 PMC5926203
174. Xiong X , Tian S , Yang P , Lebreton F , Bao H , Sheng K , Yin L , Chen P , Zhang J , Qi W , (2022). Emerging enterococcus pore-forming toxins with MHC/HLA-I as receptors. Cell 185, 1157–1171 e1122. 10.1016/j.cell.2022.02.002.35259335 PMC8978092
175. Gopalakrishnan V , Spencer CN , Nezi L , Reuben A , Andrews MC , Karpinets TV , Prieto PA , Vicente D , Hoffman K , Wei SC , (2018). Gut microbiome modulates response to anti–PD-1 immunotherapy in melanoma patients. Science 359, 97–103. 10.1126/science.aan4236.29097493 PMC5827966
176. Matson V , Fessler J , Bao R , Chongsuwat T , Zha Y , Alegre M-L , Luke JJ , and Gajewski TF (2018). The commensal microbiome is associated with anti–PD-1 efficacy in metastatic melanoma patients. Science 359, 104–108. 10.1126/science.aao3290.29302014 PMC6707353
177. Fluckiger A , Daillere R , Sassi M , Sixt BS , Liu P , Loos F , Richard C , Rabu C , Alou MT , Goubet AG , (2020). Cross-reactivity between tumor MHC class I-restricted antigens and an enterococcal bacteriophage. Science 369, 936–942. 10.1126/science.aax0701.32820119
178. Laute-Caly DL , Raftis EJ , Cowie P , Hennessy E , Holt A , Panzica DA , Sparre C , Minter B , Stroobach E , and Mulder IE (2019). The flagellin of candidate live biotherapeutic Enterococcus gallinarum MRx0518 is a potent immunostimulant. Sci Rep 9, 801. 10.1038/s41598-018-36926-8.30692549 PMC6349862
179. Stevenson A , Panzica A , Holt A , Caly DL , Ettore A , Delday M , Hennessy E , Cowie P , Pradhan M , Jeffery I , (2018). Host-microbe interactions mediating antitumorigenic effects of MRX0518, a gut microbiota-derived bacterial strain, in breast, renal and lung carcinoma. Journal of Clinical Oncology 36. DOI 10.1200/JCO.2018.36.15_suppl.e15006.
180. Rangan KJ , Pedicord VA , Wang YC , Kim B , Lu Y , Shaham S , Mucida D , and Hang HC (2016). A secreted bacterial peptidoglycan hydrolase enhances tolerance to enteric pathogens. Science 353, 1434–1437. 10.1126/science.aaf3552.27708039 PMC5158264
181. Pedicord VA , Lockhart AAK , Rangan KJ , Craig JW , Loschko J , Rogoz A , Hang HC , and Mucida D (2016). Exploiting a host-commensal interaction to promote intestinal barrier function and enteric pathogen tolerance. Sci Immunol 1. 10.1126/sciimmunol.aai7732.PMC5453653 28580440
182. Jang KK , Heaney T , London M , Ding Y , Putzel G , Yeung F , Ercelen D , Chen YH , Axelrad J , Gurunathan S , (2023). Antimicrobial overproduction sustains intestinal inflammation by inhibiting Enterococcus colonization. Cell Host Microbe 31, 1450–1468 e1458. 10.1016/j.chom.2023.08.002.37652008 PMC10502928
183. Kim B , Wang YC , Hespen CW , Espinosa J , Salje J , Rangan KJ , Oren DA , Kang JY , Pedicord VA , and Hang HC (2019). Enterococcus faecium secreted antigen A generates muropeptides to enhance host immunity and limit bacterial pathogenesis. Elife 8. 10.7554/eLife.45343.PMC6483599 30969170
184. Espinosa J , Lin TY , Estrella Y , Kim B , Molina H , and Hang HC (2020). Enterococcus NlpC/p60 Peptidoglycan Hydrolase SagA Localizes to Sites of Cell Division and Requires Only a Catalytic Dyad for Protease Activity. Biochemistry 59, 4470–4480. 10.1021/acs.biochem.0c00755.33136372 PMC8191637
185. Griffin ME , Espinosa J , Becker JL , Luo JD , Carroll TS , Jha JK , Fanger GR , and Hang HC (2021). Enterococcus peptidoglycan remodeling promotes checkpoint inhibitor cancer immunotherapy. Science 373, 1040–1046. 10.1126/science.abc9113.34446607 PMC9503018
186. Klupt S , Fam KT , Zhang X , Chodisetti PK , Mehmood A , Boyd T , Grotjahn D , Park D , and Hang HC (2024). Secreted antigen A peptidoglycan hydrolase is essential for cell separation and priming of immune checkpoint inhibitor therapy. Elife 13. ARTN RP95297 10.7554/eLife.95297.PMC11164530 38857064
187. Chen V , Griffin ME , Maguin P , Varble A , and Hang HC (2021). RecT Recombinase Expression Enables Efficient Gene Editing in Enterococcus spp. Appl Environ Microbiol 87, e0084421. 10.1128/AEM.00844-21.34232061 PMC8388837
188. Wattenberg MM , Coho H , Herrera VM , Graham K , Stone ML , Xue Y , Chang RB , Cassella C , Liu M , Choi-Bose S , (2023). Cancer immunotherapy via synergistic coactivation of myeloid receptors CD40 and Dectin-1. Sci Immunol 8, eadj5097. 10.1126/sciimmunol.adj5097.37976347 PMC11034815
189. Van Tyne D , Manson AL , Huycke MM , Karanicolas J , Earl AM , and Gilmore MS (2019). Impact of antibiotic treatment and host innate immune pressure on enterococcal adaptation in the human bloodstream. Sci Transl Med 11. 10.1126/scitranslmed.aat8418.PMC6681809 30971455
190. Chilambi GS , Nordstrom HR , Evans DR , Ferrolino JA , Hayden RT , Maron GM , Vo AN , Gilmore MS , Wolf J , Rosch JW , and Van Tyne D (2020). Evolution of vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus faecium during colonization and infection in immunocompromised pediatric patients. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 117, 11703–11714. 10.1073/pnas.1917130117.32393645 PMC7261057
191. Palmer KL , Godfrey P , Griggs A , Kos VN , Zucker J , Desjardins C , Cerqueira G , Gevers D , Walker S , Wortman J , (2012). Comparative genomics of enterococci: variation in Enterococcus faecalis, clade structure in E. faecium, and defining characteristics of E. gallinarum and E. casseliflavus. Mbio 3, e00318–00311. 10.1128/mBio.00318-11.22354958 PMC3374389
192. Gao Y , Bi D , Xie R , Li M , Guo J , Liu H , Guo X , Fang J , Ding T , Zhu H , (2021). Fusobacterium nucleatum enhances the efficacy of PD-L1 blockade in colorectal cancer. Signal Transduct Target Ther 6, 398. 10.1038/s41392-021-00795-x.34795206 PMC8602417
193. Jiang SS , Xie YL , Xiao XY , Kang ZR , Lin XL , Zhang L , Li CS , Qian Y , Xu PP , Leng XX , (2023). Fusobacterium nucleatum-derived succinic acid induces tumor resistance to immunotherapy in colorectal cancer. Cell Host Microbe 31, 781–797 e789. 10.1016/j.chom.2023.04.010.37130518
194. Hamada T , Zhang X , Mima K , Bullman S , Sukawa Y , Nowak JA , Kosumi K , Masugi Y , Twombly TS , Cao Y , (2018). Fusobacterium nucleatum in Colorectal Cancer Relates to Immune Response Differentially by Tumor Microsatellite Instability Status. Cancer Immunol Res 6, 1327–1336. 10.1158/2326-6066.CIR-18-0174.30228205 PMC6215508
195. Wang X , Fang Y , Liang W , Wong CC , Qin H , Gao Y , Liang M , Song L , Zhang Y , Fan M , (2024). Fusobacterium nucleatum facilitates anti-PD-1 therapy in microsatellite stable colorectal cancer. Cancer Cell. 10.1016/j.ccell.2024.08.019.39303724
196. Duar RM , Lin XB , Zheng J , Martino ME , Grenier T , Perez-Munoz ME , Leulier F , Ganzle M , and Walter J (2017). Lifestyles in transition: evolution and natural history of the genus Lactobacillus. FEMS Microbiol Rev 41, S27–S48. 10.1093/femsre/fux030.28673043
197. Makino S , Sato A , Goto A , Nakamura M , Ogawa M , Chiba Y , Hemmi J , Kano H , Takeda K , Okumura K , and Asami Y (2016). Enhanced natural killer cell activation by exopolysaccharides derived from yogurt fermented with Lactobacillus delbrueckii ssp. bulgaricus OLL1073R-1. J Dairy Sci 99, 915–923. 10.3168/jds.2015-10376.26686726
198. Kawanabe-Matsuda H , Takeda K , Nakamura M , Makino S , Karasaki T , Kakimi K , Nishimukai M , Ohno T , Omi J , Kano K , (2022). Dietary Lactobacillus-Derived Exopolysaccharide Enhances Immune-Checkpoint Blockade Therapy. Cancer Discov 12, 1336–1355. 10.1158/2159-8290.CD-21-0929.35180303 PMC9662940
199. Sharma G , Sharma A , Kim I , Cha DG , Kim S , Park ES , Noh JG , Lee J , Ku JH , Choi YH , (2024). A dietary commensal microbe enhances antitumor immunity by activating tumor macrophages to sequester iron. Nat Immunol 25, 790–801. 10.1038/s41590-024-01816-x.38664585
200. Segers ME , and Lebeer S (2014). Towards a better understanding of Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG--host interactions. Microb Cell Fact 13 Suppl 1, S7. 10.1186/1475-2859-13-S1-S7.25186587 PMC4155824
201. Owens JA , Saeedi BJ , Naudin CR , Hunter-Chang S , Barbian ME , Eboka RU , Askew L , Darby TM , Robinson BS , and Jones RM (2021). Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG Orchestrates an Antitumor Immune Response. Cell Mol Gastroenterol Hepatol 12, 1311–1327. 10.1016/j.jcmgh.2021.06.001.34111601 PMC8463873
202. Si W , Liang H , Bugno J , Xu Q , Ding X , Yang K , Fu Y , Weichselbaum RR , Zhao X , and Wang L (2022). Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG induces cGAS/STING-dependent type I interferon and improves response to immune checkpoint blockade. Gut 71, 521–533. 10.1136/gutjnl-2020-323426.33685966 PMC8710942
203. Ferrari V , Lo Cascio A , Melacarne A , Tanaskovic N , Mozzarelli AM , Tiraboschi L , Lizier M , Salvi M , Braga D , Algieri F , (2023). Sensitizing cancer cells to immune checkpoint inhibitors by microbiota-mediated upregulation of HLA class I. Cancer Cell 41, 1717–1730 e1714. 10.1016/j.ccell.2023.08.014.37738976
204. Agus A , Planchais J , and Sokol H (2018). Gut Microbiota Regulation of Tryptophan Metabolism in Health and Disease. Cell Host Microbe 23, 716–724. 10.1016/j.chom.2018.05.003.29902437
205. Bender MJ , McPherson AC , Phelps CM , Pandey SP , Laughlin CR , Shapira JH , Medina Sanchez L , Rana M , Richie TG , Mims TS , (2023). Dietary tryptophan metabolite released by intratumoral Lactobacillus reuteri facilitates immune checkpoint inhibitor treatment. Cell 186, 1846–1862 e1826. 10.1016/j.cell.2023.03.011.37028428 PMC10148916
206. Jia D , Wang Q , Qi Y , Jiang Y , He J , Lin Y , Sun Y , Xu J , Chen W , Fan L , (2024). Microbial metabolite enhances immunotherapy efficacy by modulating T cell stemness in pan-cancer. Cell 187, 1651–1665 e1621. 10.1016/j.cell.2024.02.022.38490195
207. Sugimura N , Li Q , Chu ESH , Lau HCH , Fong W , Liu W , Liang C , Nakatsu G , Su ACY , Coker OO , (2021). Lactobacillus gallinarum modulates the gut microbiota and produces anti-cancer metabolites to protect against colorectal tumourigenesis. Gut 71, 2011–2021. 10.1136/gutjnl-2020-323951.34937766 PMC9484392
208. Zhang Q , Zhao Q , Li T , Lu L , Wang F , Zhang H , Liu Z , Ma H , Zhu Q , Wang J , (2023). Lactobacillus plantarum-derived indole-3-lactic acid ameliorates colorectal tumorigenesis via epigenetic regulation of CD8(+) T cell immunity. Cell Metab 35, 943–960 e949. 10.1016/j.cmet.2023.04.015.37192617
209. Fong W , Li Q , Ji F , Liang W , Lau HCH , Kang X , Liu W , To KK , Zuo Z , Li X , (2023). Lactobacillus gallinarum-derived metabolites boost anti-PD1 efficacy in colorectal cancer by inhibiting regulatory T cells through modulating IDO1/Kyn/AHR axis. Gut 72, 2272–2285. 10.1136/gutjnl-2023-329543.37770127 PMC10715476
210. Martin R , Rios-Covian D , Huillet E , Auger S , Khazaal S , Bermudez-Humaran LG , Sokol H , Chatel JM , and Langella P (2023). Faecalibacterium: a bacterial genus with promising human health applications. FEMS Microbiol Rev 47. 10.1093/femsre/fuad039.PMC10410495 37451743
211. Gunjur A , Shao Y , Rozday T , Klein O , Mu A , Haak BW , Markman B , Kee D , Carlino MS , Underhill C , (2024). A gut microbial signature for combination immune checkpoint blockade across cancer types. Nat Med 30, 797–809. 10.1038/s41591-024-02823-z.38429524 PMC10957475
212. Spencer CN , McQuade JL , Gopalakrishnan V , McCulloch JA , Vetizou M , Cogdill AP , Khan MAW , Zhang X , White MG , Peterson CB , (2021). Dietary fiber and probiotics influence the gut microbiome and melanoma immunotherapy response. Science 374, 1632–1640. 10.1126/science.aaz7015.34941392 PMC8970537
213. Bredon M , Danne C , Pham HP , Ruffie P , Bessede A , Rolhion N , Creusot L , Brot L , Alonso I , Langella P , (2024). Faecalibaterium prausnitzii strain EXL01 boosts efficacy of immune checkpoint inhibitors. Oncoimmunology 13, 2374954. 10.1080/2162402X.2024.2374954.38957477 PMC11218805
214. Gao Y , Xu P , Sun D , Jiang Y , Lin XL , Han T , Yu J , Sheng C , Chen H , Hong J , (2023). Faecalibacterium prausnitzii Abrogates Intestinal Toxicity and Promotes Tumor Immunity to Increase the Efficacy of Dual CTLA4 and PD-1 Checkpoint Blockade. Cancer Res 83, 3710–3725. 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-23-0605.37602831
215. Lopez-Siles M , Duncan SH , Garcia-Gil LJ , and Martinez-Medina M (2017). Faecalibacterium prausnitzii: from microbiology to diagnostics and prognostics. ISME J 11, 841–852. 10.1038/ismej.2016.176.28045459 PMC5364359
216. Crost EH , Coletto E , Bell A , and Juge N (2023). Ruminococcus gnavus: friend or foe for human health. FEMS Microbiol Rev 47. 10.1093/femsre/fuad014.PMC10112845 37015876
217. Zhang X , Yu D , Wu D , Gao X , Shao F , Zhao M , Wang J , Ma J , Wang W , Qin X , (2023). Tissue-resident Lachnospiraceae family bacteria protect against colorectal carcinogenesis by promoting tumor immune surveillance. Cell Host Microbe 31, 418–432 e418. 10.1016/j.chom.2023.01.013.36893736
218. Roelands J , Kuppen PJK , Ahmed EI , Mall R , Masoodi T , Singh P , Monaco G , Raynaud C , de Miranda N , Ferraro L , (2023). An integrated tumor, immune and microbiome atlas of colon cancer. Nat Med 29, 1273–1286. 10.1038/s41591-023-02324-5.37202560 PMC10202816
219. Usyk M , Hayes RB , Knight R , Gonzalez A , Li H , Osman I , Weber JS , and Ahn J (2024). Gut microbiome is associated with recurrence-free survival in patients with resected Stage IIIB-D or Stage IV melanoma treated with immune checkpoint inhibitors. bioRxiv. 10.1101/2024.04.16.589761.
220. Di Luccia B , Molgora M , Khantakova D , Jaeger N , Chang HW , Czepielewski RS , Helmink BA , Onufer EJ , Fachi JL , Bhattarai B , (2024). TREM2 deficiency reprograms intestinal macrophages and microbiota to enhance anti-PD-1 tumor immunotherapy. Sci Immunol 9, eadi5374. 10.1126/sciimmunol.adi5374.38758808 PMC11299520
221. Henke MT , Kenny DJ , Cassilly CD , Vlamakis H , Xavier RJ , and Clardy J (2019). Ruminococcus gnavus, a member of the human gut microbiome associated with Crohn’s disease, produces an inflammatory polysaccharide. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 116, 12672–12677. 10.1073/pnas.1904099116.31182571 PMC6601261
222. Henke MT , Brown EM , Cassilly CD , Vlamakis H , Xavier RJ , and Clardy J (2021). Capsular polysaccharide correlates with immune response to the human gut microbe Ruminococcus gnavus. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 118. 10.1073/pnas.2007595118.PMC8157926 33972416
223. Shin YH , Bang S , Park SM , Ma X , Cassilly C , Graham D , Xavier R , and Clardy J (2023). Revisiting Coley’s Toxins: Immunogenic Cardiolipins from Streptococcus pyogenes. J Am Chem Soc 145, 21183–21188. 10.1021/jacs.3c07727.37738205 PMC10557101
224. Sardar P , Beresford-Jones BS , Xia WMY , Shabana O , Suyama S , Ramos RJF , Soderholm AT , Tourlomousis P , Kuo PL , Evans AC , (2025). Gut microbiota-derived hexa-acylated lipopolysaccharides enhance cancer immunotherapy responses. Nature Microbiology 10. 10.1038/s41564-025-01930-y.PMC11879847 39929976
225. Park JS , Gazzaniga FS , Wu M , Luthens AK , Gillis J , Zheng W , LaFleur MW , Johnson SB , Morad G , Park EM , (2023). Targeting PD-L2-RGMb overcomes microbiome-related immunotherapy resistance. Nature 617, 377–385. 10.1038/s41586-023-06026-3.37138075 PMC10219577
226. Wang Z , Klipfell E , Bennett BJ , Koeth R , Levison BS , Dugar B , Feldstein AE , Britt EB , Fu X , Chung YM , (2011). Gut flora metabolism of phosphatidylcholine promotes cardiovascular disease. Nature 472, 57–63. 10.1038/nature09922.21475195 PMC3086762
227. Wang H , Rong X , Zhao G , Zhou Y , Xiao Y , Ma D , Jin X , Wu Y , Yan Y , Yang H , (2022). The microbial metabolite trimethylamine N-oxide promotes antitumor immunity in triple-negative breast cancer. Cell Metab 34, 581–594 e588. 10.1016/j.cmet.2022.02.010.35278352
228. Mirji G , Worth A , Bhat SA , El Sayed M , Kannan T , Goldman AR , Tang HY , Liu Q , Auslander N , Dang CV , (2022). The microbiome-derived metabolite TMAO drives immune activation and boosts responses to immune checkpoint blockade in pancreatic cancer. Sci Immunol 7, eabn0704. 10.1126/sciimmunol.abn0704.36083892 PMC9925043
229. Coutzac C , Jouniaux JM , Paci A , Schmidt J , Mallardo D , Seck A , Asvatourian V , Cassard L , Saulnier P , Lacroix L , (2020). Systemic short chain fatty acids limit antitumor effect of CTLA-4 blockade in hosts with cancer. Nat Commun 11, 2168. 10.1038/s41467-020-16079-x.32358520 PMC7195489
230. Luu M , Weigand K , Wedi F , Breidenbend C , Leister H , Pautz S , Adhikary T , and Visekruna A (2018). Regulation of the effector function of CD8(+) T cells by gut microbiota-derived metabolite butyrate. Sci Rep 8, 14430. 10.1038/s41598-018-32860-x.30258117 PMC6158259
231. Luu M , Riester Z , Baldrich A , Reichardt N , Yuille S , Busetti A , Klein M , Wempe A , Leister H , Raifer H , (2021). Microbial short-chain fatty acids modulate CD8(+) T cell responses and improve adoptive immunotherapy for cancer. Nat Commun 12, 4077. 10.1038/s41467-021-24331-1.34210970 PMC8249424
232. Kang X , Liu C , Ding Y , Ni Y , Ji F , Lau HCH , Jiang L , Sung JJ , Wong SH , and Yu J (2023). Roseburia intestinalis generated butyrate boosts anti-PD-1 efficacy in colorectal cancer by activating cytotoxic CD8(+) T cells. Gut 72, 2112–2122. 10.1136/gutjnl-2023-330291.37491158 PMC10579466
233. Huang X , Hu M , Sun T , Li J , Zhou Y , Yan Y , Xuan B , Wang J , Xiong H , Ji L , (2023). Multi-kingdom gut microbiota analyses define bacterial-fungal interplay and microbial markers of pan-cancer immunotherapy across cohorts. Cell Host Microbe 31, 1930–1943 e1934. 10.1016/j.chom.2023.10.005.37944495
234. Fishbein SRS , Mahmud B , and Dantas G (2023). Antibiotic perturbations to the gut microbiome. Nat Rev Microbiol 21, 772–788. 10.1038/s41579-023-00933-y.37491458 PMC12087466
235. Fidelle M , Rauber C , Alves Costa Silva C , Tian AL , Lahmar I , de La Varende AM , Zhao L , Thelemaque C , Lebhar I , Messaoudene M , (2023). A microbiota-modulated checkpoint directs immunosuppressive intestinal T cells into cancers. Science 380, eabo2296. 10.1126/science.abo2296.37289890
236. Liu Y , Wong CC , Ding Y , Gao M , Wen J , Lau HC , Cheung AH , Huang D , Huang H , and Yu J (2024). Peptostreptococcus anaerobius mediates anti-PD1 therapy resistance and exacerbates colorectal cancer via myeloid-derived suppressor cells in mice. Nat Microbiol 9, 1467–1482. 10.1038/s41564-024-01695-w.38750176 PMC11153135
237. Zitvogel L , Fidelle M , and Kroemer G (2024). Long-distance microbial mechanisms impacting cancer immunosurveillance. Immunity 57, 2013–2029. 10.1016/j.immuni.2024.07.020.39151425
238. Choi Y , Lichterman JN , Coughlin LA , Poulides N , Li W , Del Valle P , Palmer SN , Gan S , Kim J , Zhan X , (2023). Immune checkpoint blockade induces gut microbiota translocation that augments extraintestinal antitumor immunity. Sci Immunol 8, eabo2003. 10.1126/sciimmunol.abo2003.36867675 PMC10080670
239. Botos I , Segal DM , and Davies DR (2011). The structural biology of Toll-like receptors. Structure 19, 447–459. 10.1016/j.str.2011.02.004.21481769 PMC3075535
240. Jin MS , Kim SE , Heo JY , Lee ME , Kim HM , Paik SG , Lee H , and Lee JO (2007). Crystal structure of the TLR1-TLR2 heterodimer induced by binding of a tri-acylated lipopeptide. Cell 130, 1071–1082. 10.1016/j.cell.2007.09.008.17889651
241. Kang JY , Nan X , Jin MS , Youn SJ , Ryu YH , Mah S , Han SH , Lee H , Paik SG , and Lee JO (2009). Recognition of lipopeptide patterns by Toll-like receptor 2-Toll-like receptor 6 heterodimer. Immunity 31, 873–884. 10.1016/j.immuni.2009.09.018.19931471
242. Reis ESC , Yamasaki S , and Brown GD (2024). Myeloid C-type lectin receptors in innate immune recognition. Immunity 57, 700–717. 10.1016/j.immuni.2024.03.005.38599166
243. Quinn RA , Melnik AV , Vrbanac A , Fu T , Patras KA , Christy MP , Bodai Z , Belda-Ferre P , Tripathi A , Chung LK , (2020). Global chemical effects of the microbiome include new bile-acid conjugations. Nature 579, 123–129. 10.1038/s41586-020-2047-9.32103176 PMC7252668
244. Mohanty I , Mannochio-Russo H , Schweer JV , El Abiead Y , Bittremieux W , Xing S , Schmid R , Zuffa S , Vasquez F , Muti VB , (2024). The underappreciated diversity of bile acid modifications. Cell 187, 1801–1818 e1820. 10.1016/j.cell.2024.02.019.38471500 PMC12248420
245. Lee MH , Nuccio SP , Mohanty I , Hagey LR , Dorrestein PC , Chu H , and Raffatellu M (2024). How bile acids and the microbiota interact to shape host immunity. Nat Rev Immunol. 10.1038/s41577-024-01057-x.39009868
246. Keller LJ , Babin BM , Lakemeyer M , and Bogyo M (2020). Activity-based protein profiling in bacteria: Applications for identification of therapeutic targets and characterization of microbial communities. Curr Opin Chem Biol 54, 45–53. 10.1016/j.cbpa.2019.10.007.31835131 PMC7131876
247. Woo AYM , Aguilar Ramos MA , Narayan R , Richards-Corke KC , Wang ML , Sandoval-Espinola WJ , and Balskus EP (2023). Targeting the human gut microbiome with small-molecule inhibitors. Nat Rev Chem 7, 319–339. 10.1038/s41570-023-00471-4.37117817
248. Niphakis MJ , and Cravatt BF (2014). Enzyme inhibitor discovery by activity-based protein profiling. Annu Rev Biochem 83, 341–377. 10.1146/annurev-biochem-060713-035708.24905785
249. Liu Y , Patricelli MP , and Cravatt BF (1999). Activity-based protein profiling: the serine hydrolases. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 96, 14694–14699. 10.1073/pnas.96.26.14694.10611275 PMC24710
250. Keller LJ , Nguyen TH , Liu LJ , Hurysz BM , Lakemeyer M , Guerra M , Gelsinger DJ , Chanin R , Ngo N , Lum KM , (2023). Chemoproteomic identification of a DPP4 homolog in Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron. Nat Chem Biol 19, 1469–1479. 10.1038/s41589-023-01357-8.37349583
251. Parasar B , Zhou H , Xiao X , Shi Q , Brito IL , and Chang PV (2019). Chemoproteomic Profiling of Gut Microbiota-Associated Bile Salt Hydrolase Activity. ACS Cent Sci 5, 867–873. 10.1021/acscentsci.9b00147.31139722 PMC6535767
252. Adhikari AA , Seegar TCM , Ficarro SB , McCurry MD , Ramachandran D , Yao L , Chaudhari SN , Ndousse-Fetter S , Banks AS , Marto JA , (2020). Development of a covalent inhibitor of gut bacterial bile salt hydrolases. Nat Chem Biol 16, 318–326. 10.1038/s41589-020-0467-3.32042200 PMC7036035
253. Yang X , Stein KR , and Hang HC (2022). Anti-infective bile acids bind and inactivate a Salmonella virulence regulator. Nat Chem Biol. 10.1038/s41589-022-01122-3.PMC9805502 36175659
254. Zhang ZJ , Pedicord VA , Peng T , and Hang HC (2020). Site-specific acylation of a bacterial virulence regulator attenuates infection. Nat Chem Biol 16, 95–103. 10.1038/s41589-019-0392-5.31740807 PMC8439376
255. Yang X , Stein KR , and Hang HC (2023). Anti-infective bile acids bind and inactivate a Salmonella virulence regulator. Nat Chem Biol 19, 91–100. 10.1038/s41589-022-01122-3.36175659 PMC9805502
256. Yang X , Zhao X , Chen V , and Hang HC (2022). Chemical proteomic analysis of bile acid-protein targets in Enterococcus faecium. RSC Chem Biol 3, 1397–1402. 10.1039/d2cb00178k.36544573 PMC9709779
257. Forster ER , Yang X , Tai AK , Hang HC , and Shen A (2022). Identification of a Bile Acid-Binding Transcription Factor in Clostridioides difficile Using Chemical Proteomics. ACS Chem Biol 17, 3086–3099. 10.1021/acschembio.2c00463.36279369 PMC10518218
258. Zhao X , Stein KR , Chen V , Griffin ME , Lairson LL , and Hang HC (2023). Chemoproteomics reveals microbiota-derived aromatic monoamine agonists for GPRC5A. Nat Chem Biol 19, 1205–1214. 10.1038/s41589-023-01328-z.37248411
259. Zhao X , Yang X , and Hang HC (2022). Chemoproteomic Analysis of Microbiota Metabolite-Protein Targets and Mechanisms. Biochemistry 61, 2822–2834. 10.1021/acs.biochem.1c00758.34989554 PMC9256862
260. Zhang ZJ , Wang YC , Yang X , and Hang HC (2020). Chemical Reporters for Exploring Microbiology and Microbiota Mechanisms. Chembiochem 21, 19–32. 10.1002/cbic.201900535.31730246 PMC7008969
261. Yang YY , Ascano JM , and Hang HC (2010). Bioorthogonal chemical reporters for monitoring protein acetylation. J Am Chem Soc 132, 3640–3641. 10.1021/ja908871t.20192265 PMC2848987
262. Volpe MR , Velilla JA , Daniel-Ivad M , Yao JJ , Stornetta A , Villalta PW , Huang HC , Bachovchin DA , Balbo S , Gaudet R , and Balskus EP (2023). A small molecule inhibitor prevents gut bacterial genotoxin production. Nat Chem Biol 19, 159–167. 10.1038/s41589-022-01147-8.36253549 PMC9889270
263. Thomas AM , Fidelle M , Routy B , Kroemer G , Wargo JA , Segata N , and Zitvogel L (2023). Gut OncoMicrobiome Signatures (GOMS) as next-generation biomarkers for cancer immunotherapy. Nat Rev Clin Oncol 20, 583–603. 10.1038/s41571-023-00785-8.37365438 PMC11258874
264. Silva CAC , Fidelle M , Almonte AA , Derosa L , and Zitvogel L (2024). Gut Microbiota-Related Biomarkers in Immuno-Oncology. Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol. 10.1146/annurev-pharmtox-061124-102218.39259979
265. Simpson RC , Shanahan ER , Batten M , Reijers ILM , Read M , Silva IP , Versluis JM , Ribeiro R , Angelatos AS , Tan J , (2022). Diet-driven microbial ecology underpins associations between cancer immunotherapy outcomes and the gut microbiome. Nat Med 28, 2344–2352. 10.1038/s41591-022-01965-2.36138151
266. Nguyen NA , Jiang Y , and McQuade JL (2024). Eating away cancer: the potential of diet and the microbiome for shaping immunotherapy outcome. Front Immunol 15, 1409414. 10.3389/fimmu.2024.1409414.38873602 PMC11169628
267. Geiger R , Rieckmann JC , Wolf T , Basso C , Feng Y , Fuhrer T , Kogadeeva M , Picotti P , Meissner F , Mann M , (2016). L-Arginine Modulates T Cell Metabolism and Enhances Survival and Anti-tumor Activity. Cell 167, 829–842 e813. 10.1016/j.cell.2016.09.031.27745970 PMC5075284
268. Canale FP , Basso C , Antonini G , Perotti M , Li N , Sokolovska A , Neumann J , James MJ , Geiger S , Jin W , (2021). Metabolic modulation of tumours with engineered bacteria for immunotherapy. Nature 598, 662–666. 10.1038/s41586-021-04003-2.34616044
269. Peyraud F , Guegan JP , Bodet D , Nafia I , Fontan L , Auzanneau C , Cousin S , Roubaud G , Cabart M , Chomy F , (2022). Circulating L-arginine predicts the survival of cancer patients treated with immune checkpoint inhibitors. Ann Oncol 33, 1041–1051. 10.1016/j.annonc.2022.07.001.35850444
270. Vincent RL , Gurbatri CR , Li F , Vardoshvili A , Coker C , Im J , Ballister ER , Rouanne M , Savage T , de Los Santos-Alexis K , (2023). Probiotic-guided CAR-T cells for solid tumor targeting. Science 382, 211–218. 10.1126/science.add7034.37824640 PMC10915968
271. Chen YE , Bousbaine D , Veinbachs A , Atabakhsh K , Dimas A , Yu VK , Zhao A , Enright NJ , Nagashima K , Belkaid Y , and Fischbach MA (2023). Engineered skin bacteria induce antitumor T cell responses against melanoma. Science 380, 203–210. 10.1126/science.abp9563.37053311 PMC12356174
272. Bousbaine D , Bauman KD , Chen YE , Yu VK , Lalgudi PV , Naziripour A , Veinbachs A , Phung JL , Nguyen TTD , Swenson JM , (2024). Discovery and engineering of the antibody response against a prominent skin commensal. bioRxiv. 10.1101/2024.01.23.576900.PMC12045117 39662508
273. Kalaora S , Nagler A , Nejman D , Alon M , Barbolin C , Barnea E , Ketelaars SLC , Cheng K , Vervier K , Shental N , (2021). Identification of bacteria-derived HLA-bound peptides in melanoma. Nature 592, 138–143. 10.1038/s41586-021-03368-8.33731925 PMC9717498
274. Sellars MC , Wu CJ , and Fritsch EF (2022). Cancer vaccines: Building a bridge over troubled waters. Cell 185, 2770–2788. 10.1016/j.cell.2022.06.035.35835100 PMC9555301
275. Morin MD , Wang Y , Jones BT , Mifune Y , Su L , Shi H , Moresco EMY , Zhang H , Beutler B , and Boger DL (2018). Diprovocims: A New and Exceptionally Potent Class of Toll-like Receptor Agonists. J Am Chem Soc 140, 14440–14454. 10.1021/jacs.8b09223.30272974 PMC6209530
276. Wang Y , Su L , Morin MD , Jones BT , Mifune Y , Shi H , Wang KW , Zhan X , Liu A , Wang J , (2018). Adjuvant effect of the novel TLR1/TLR2 agonist Diprovocim synergizes with anti-PD-L1 to eliminate melanoma in mice. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 115, E8698–E8706. 10.1073/pnas.1809232115.30150374 PMC6140543
277. Yang MH , Russell JL , Mifune Y , Wang Y , Shi H , Moresco EMY , Siegwart DJ , Beutler B , and Boger DL (2022). Next-Generation Diprovocims with Potent Human and Murine TLR1/TLR2 Agonist Activity That Activate the Innate and Adaptive Immune Response. J Med Chem 65, 9230–9252. 10.1021/acs.jmedchem.2c00419.35767437 PMC9283309
278. Rolfo C , Giovannetti E , Martinez P , McCue S , and Naing A (2023). Applications and clinical trial landscape using Toll-like receptor agonists to reduce the toll of cancer. NPJ Precis Oncol 7, 26. 10.1038/s41698-023-00364-1.36890302 PMC9995514
279. Le Naour J , and Kroemer G (2023). Trial watch: Toll-like receptor ligands in cancer therapy. Oncoimmunology 12, 2180237. 10.1080/2162402X.2023.2180237.36875550 PMC9980677
280. Griffin ME , Hespen CW , Wang YC , and Hang HC (2019). Translation of peptidoglycan metabolites into immunotherapeutics. Clin Transl Immunology 8, e1095. 10.1002/cti2.1095.31798878 PMC6883908
281. Borriello F , Poli V , Shrock E , Spreafico R , Liu X , Pishesha N , Carpenet C , Chou J , Di Gioia M , McGrath ME , (2022). An adjuvant strategy enabled by modulation of the physical properties of microbial ligands expands antigen immunogenicity. Cell 185, 614–629 e621. 10.1016/j.cell.2022.01.009.35148840 PMC8857056
282. Griffin ME , Tsukidate T , and Hang HC (2023). N-Arylpyrazole NOD2 Agonists Promote Immune Checkpoint Inhibitor Therapy. ACS Chem Biol 18, 1368–1377. 10.1021/acschembio.3c00085.37172210 PMC10578902
283. Guzelj S , Bizjak S , and Jakopin Z (2022). Discovery of Desmuramylpeptide NOD2 Agonists with Single-Digit Nanomolar Potency. ACS Med Chem Lett 13, 1270–1277. 10.1021/acsmedchemlett.2c00121.35978688 PMC9377006
284. Ma X , Qiu Y , Sun Y , Zhu L , Zhao Y , Li T , Lin Y , Ma D , Qin Z , Sun C , and Han L (2020). NOD2 inhibits tumorigenesis and increases chemosensitivity of hepatocellular carcinoma by targeting AMPK pathway. Cell Death Dis 11, 174. 10.1038/s41419-020-2368-5.32144252 PMC7060316
285. Yun F , Wu N , Yi X , Zhang X , Feng Y , Ni Q , Gai Y , Li E , Yang Z , Zhang Q , (2024). NOD2 reduces the chemoresistance of melanoma by inhibiting the TYMS/PLK1 signaling axis. Cell Death Dis 15, 720. 10.1038/s41419-024-07104-8.39353904 PMC11445241
286. Meyers PA , and Chou AJ (2014). Muramyl tripeptide-phosphatidyl ethanolamine encapsulated in liposomes (L-MTP-PE) in the treatment of osteosarcoma. Adv Exp Med Biol 804, 307–321. 10.1007/978-3-319-04843-7_17.24924182
287. Chen J , Haller CA , Jernigan FE , Koerner SK , Wong DJ , Wang Y , Cheong JE , Kosaraju R , Kwan J , Park DD , (2020). Modulation of lymphocyte-mediated tissue repair by rational design of heterocyclic aryl hydrocarbon receptor agonists. Sci Adv 6, eaay8230. 10.1126/sciadv.aay8230.31998845 PMC6962035
