
JOURNAL INFORMATION
==============================
NLM Title Abbreviation: Poult Sci
Journal ID: Poult Sci

Poultry Science

ISSN: 0032-5791
EISSN: 1525-3171
Publisher: Elsevier

ARTICLE INFORMATION
==============================
PMCID: PMC10371856
PMID: 37454641
DOI: 10.1016/j.psj.2023.102786
Article ID: S0032-5791(23)00305-X
Article ID: 102786
Article version: 1
Subjects: MICROBIOLOGY AND FOOD SAFETY

Avian campylobacteriosis, prevalence, sources, hazards, antibiotic resistance, poultry meat contamination, and control measures: a comprehensive review

El-Saadony Mohamed T. a
Saad Ahmed M. b
Yang Tao c
Salem Heba M. d
Korma Sameh A. e
Ahmed Ahmed Ezzat f g
Mosa Walid F.A. h
Abd El-Mageed Taia A. i
Selim Samy j
Al Jaouni Soad K. k
Zaghloul Rashed A. l
Abd El-Hack Mohamed E. m
El-Tarabily Khaled A. ktarabily@uaeu.ac.ae n 1
Ibrahim Salam A. o
a Department of Agricultural Microbiology, Faculty of Agriculture, Zagazig University, Zagazig, 44511, Egypt
b Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Agriculture, Zagazig University, Zagazig, 44511, Egypt
c Key Laboratory of Tropical Translational Medicine of Ministry of Education, School of Pharmacy, Hainan Medical University, Haikou, 571199, China
d Department of Poultry Diseases, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Cairo University, Giza, 12211, Egypt
e Department of Food Science, Faculty of Agriculture, Zagazig University, Zagazig, 44511, Egypt
f Biology Department, College of Science, King Khalid University, Abha, 61413, Saudi Arabia
g Research Center for Advanced Materials Science (RCAMS), King Khalid University, Abha, 61413, Saudi Arabia
h Plant Production Department (Horticulture-Pomology), Faculty of Agriculture, Saba Basha, Alexandria University, Alexandria, 21531, Egypt
i Department of Soils and Water, Faculty of Agriculture, Fayoum University, Fayoum, 63514, Egypt
j Department of Clinical Laboratory Sciences, College of Applied Medical Sciences, Jouf University, Sakaka, 72388, Saudi Arabia
k Department of Hematology/Oncology, Yousef Abdulatif Jameel Scientific Chair of Prophetic Medicine Application, Faculty of Medicine, King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah, 21589, Saudi Arabia
l Department Agricultural Microbiology, Faculty of Agriculture, Benha University, Moshtohor, Qaluybia, 13736, Egypt
m Poultry Department, Faculty of Agriculture, Zagazig University, Zagazig, 44511, Egypt
n Department of Biology, College of Science, United Arab Emirates University, Al Ain, 15551, United Arab Emirates
o Food Microbiology and Biotechnology Laboratory, Carver Hall, College of Agriculture and Environmental Sciences, North Carolina A & T State University, Greensboro, NC, 27411-1064
1 Corresponding author: ktarabily@uaeu.ac.ae
Publication date: 2023 Sep
Electronic publication date: 2023 May 19
Volume: 102
Issue: 9
Electronic Location ID: 102786
Received 2023 Feb 23; Accepted 2023 May 13
Copyright: © 2023 The Authors
Copyright year: 2023
License: This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
License URL: https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/

Keywords: broiler processing, Campylobacter, control strategies, foodborne infection, natural compounds

==============================
Avian campylobacteriosis is a vandal infection that poses human health hazards. Campylobacter is usually colonized in the avian gut revealing mild signs in the infected birds, but retail chicken carcasses have high contamination levels of Campylobacter spp. Consequently, the contaminated avian products constitute the main source of human infection with campylobacteriosis and result in severe clinical symptoms such as diarrhea, abdominal pain, spasm, and deaths in sensitive cases. Thus, the current review aims to shed light on the prevalence of Campylobacter in broiler chickens, Campylobacter colonization, bird immunity against Campylobacter, sources of poultry infection, antibiotic resistance, poultry meat contamination, human health hazard, and the use of standard antimicrobial technology during the chicken processing of possible control strategies to overcome such problems.

INTRODUCTION

Campylobacter is a gram-negative, facultative intracellular bacteria which belongs to epsilon proteobacteria which is a class of proteobacteria (Mota-Gutierrez et al., 2022). At the same time, it has been described as an animal pathogen since the early 1900s due to its particular growing conditions (Skirrow, 2006). Its importance as a causative agent of bacterial gut illness was not established until the 1970s with a selective medium that could isolate and sustain the growth of Campylobacter in the laboratory (Allos, 2001).

Campylobacter was previously taxonomically grouped as Vibrio spp., and its infections in humans and animals were described as “related Vibrio infections” (Johnson et al., 2017; Wales et al., 2019). In 1963, the genus Campylobacter had been proposed by Sebald and Veron (1963). Subsequently, Vibrio-like organisms, including Campylobacter coli and Campylobacter jejuni, were regrouped as Campylobacter spp., in 1973 (Véron and Chatelain, 1973).

Campylobacter is a strain of bacteria that thrives only under very specific conditions, and it requires extraordinary conditions to grow (Hazeleger et al., 1998). Campylobacter is a thermophilic bacterium, growing optimally at temperature of 42°C, while minimal growth appears at 31°C to 32°C (Hazeleger et al., 1998). Furthermore, it is a microaerobic bacteria that requires approximately 5% O2, 10% CO2, and 85% N2 to grow (Bolton et al., 1997). Another distinctive characteristic that separates Campylobacter from other enteric bacteria is its inability to metabolize glucose (Hofreuter, 2014).

In addition, Campylobacter utilizes tricarboxylic acid cycle intermediates and amino acids as carbon resources (Guccione et al., 2008; Hofreuter, 2014). Despite the metabolic limitations, Campylobacter can colonize wild and domestic animal hosts (Sheppard and Maiden, 2015). The avian species is the preferred host species of Campylobacter, as its optimal growth is supported by the avian species' natural intestinal temperature (Wagenaar et al., 2015). Campylobacter is also sensitive to several environmental stressors, including exposure to atmospheric oxygen levels (Smith et al., 2016; Hsieh et al., 2018), dehydration (Line, 2006), as well as heat (Klančnik et al., 2014) and cold shocks (Josefsen et al., 2015).

However, using different survival mechanisms, Campylobacter can survive extended periods in unfavorable environmental conditions (Hughes et al., 2009). Campylobacter has been noticed to be a viable but nonculturable (VBNC) conditions upon subject to unfavorable circumstances (Hazeleger et al.,1994). Morphological changes characterize the VBNC state, reduced metabolic rates, increased chemical and physical stressors tolerance, and decreased culture ability in growth media (Lv et al., 2020).

It is also debatable whether VBNC Campylobacter cells can be resuscitated to colonize the host and initiate infection in the host (Ballou et al., 2016). Additionally, it was noticed that Campylobacter could perform biofilm when subjected to an aerobic environment (Bezek et al., 2016). Ica et al. (2012) revealed that Campylobacter cells might enter a VBNC state once the biofilm is formed to protect the cells from dangerous conditions. However, Teh et al. (2014) argued that there is not enough evidence to conclude that biofilm formation in Campylobacter is a part of the survival mechanism; instead, the observed formation of biofilm may be a result of simple attachment to abiotic surfaces or food matrices (Teh et al., 2014). Nonetheless, the capability of Campylobacter to live outside the host and adapt to different environmental circumstances demonstrates how Campylobacter can survive via the food production chain (Firlieyanti et al., 2016; EFSA and ECDPC, 2019; Elgamoudi et al., 2020; Habib et al., 2023).

The morphological, biochemical, and physiological characteristics of Campylobacter spp. are presented in Figure 1. Recently molecular tools were known as the best methods used for microbial identification (Hong et al., 2023). The world is directed to the use of natural materials which have been proved to have antimicrobial effects against different species of Campylobacter (Balta et al., 2021). The antimicrobial activity of some natural compounds against different species of Campylobacter biofilm, their minimal inhibitory concentration (MIC), and their mode of action are summarized in Table 1.Figure 1 The morphological, biochemical, and physiological characteristics of Campylobacter species.

Figure 1

Table 1 The antimicrobial activity of some natural compounds against different species of Campylobacter biofilm, their minimal inhibitory concentration (MIC), and their mode of action.

Table 1Natural compounds	MIC	Campylobacter strain	Mechanism	References	
Essential oils and polyphenolic extracts	
	
Cinnamaldehyde	1.76 µg mL−1	Campylobacter coli	A substance deposited on the bilayer surface that causes membrane instability	Wagle et al., 2019	
Eugenol	2.69 µg mL−1	Campylobacter jejuni NCTC 81–176	Degradation of the extracellular matrix	Klančnik et al., 2021	
Carvacrol	31.25 µg mL−1	Campylobacter jejuni NCTC 11168	Disintegration of hydrophobicity by binding membrane hydrophobic groups	Šimunović et al., 2020	
(−)-α-Pinene	125 µg mL−1	Campylobacter jejuni RC039	A substance deposited on the bilayer surface that causes membrane instability	Salehi et al., 2019	
Resveratrol	200 µg mL−1	Campylobacter jejuni S-8	Inhibition of AI-2 molecule activity	Roila et al., 2019	
Diallyl sulfide	40 µg mL−1	Campylobacter jejuni F38011	Disintegration of hydrophobicity by binding membrane hydrophobic groups	Duarte et al., 2015	
Clove oil	400 µg mL−1	Campylobacter jejuni 180ip	A substance deposited on the bilayer surface that causes membrane instability	Wagle et al., 2021	
Lavender essential oil	1000 µg mL−1	Campylobacter jejuni 238ip	Inhibition of AI-2 molecule activity	Gahamanyi et al., 2020	
Juniper essential oil	1000 µg mL−1	Campylobacter coli	A substance deposited on the bilayer surface that causes membrane instability	Gahamanyi et al., 2020	
Grapefruit seed extract	60 µg mL−1	Campylobacter jejuni NCTC 81–176	A substance deposited on the bilayer surface that causes membrane instability	Silveira et al., 2019	
Citrus lemon peel extract	225 µg mL−1	Campylobacter jejuni NCTC 11168	Degradation of the extracellular matrix	Castillo et al., 2014	
Green tea extract	50 µg mL−1	Campylobacter jejuni RC039	Disintegration of hydrophobicity by binding membrane hydrophobic groups	Wagle et al., 2021	
	
Antimicrobial peptides and amino acids	
	
Puroindoline A (PinA)	512 µg mL−1	Campylobacter jejuni 81–176
Campylobacter jejuni RC039
Campylobacter jejuni S-8	Reacting with specific membrane components, such as anionic phospholipids and lipopolysaccharides, which break down the membrane and kills bacteria. The reaction may depend on the hydrophobicity of peptides by binding hydrophobic membrane groups. Additionally, peptides are deposited on the bilayer surface due to ionic/electrostatic interactions, resulting in membrane instability and disintegration. When peptides contain both hydrophobic and hydrophilic residues, a property known as amphipathicity, both of the preceding mechanisms may be at work. In addition, peptide length is crucial; short peptides have an excellent amphipathic structure and potent antimicrobial activity.	McDougald et al., 2012	
White kidney bean protein hydrolysate	90 µg mL−1	Campylobacter jejuni NCTC 11168	Reacting with specific membrane components, such as anionic phospholipids and lipopolysaccharides, which break down the membrane and kills bacteria. The reaction may depend on the hydrophobicity of peptides by binding hydrophobic membrane groups. Additionally, peptides are deposited on the bilayer surface due to ionic/electrostatic interactions, resulting in membrane instability and disintegration. When peptides contain both hydrophobic and hydrophilic residues, a property known as amphipathicity, both of the preceding mechanisms may be at work. In addition, peptide length is crucial; short peptides have an excellent amphipathic structure and potent antimicrobial activity.	Saad et al., 2021	
Red kidney bean protein hydrolysate	75 µg mL−1	Campylobacter jejuni NCTC 11168	Reacting with specific membrane components, such as anionic phospholipids and lipopolysaccharides, which break down the membrane and kills bacteria. The reaction may depend on the hydrophobicity of peptides by binding hydrophobic membrane groups. Additionally, peptides are deposited on the bilayer surface due to ionic/electrostatic interactions, resulting in membrane instability and disintegration. When peptides contain both hydrophobic and hydrophilic residues, a property known as amphipathicity, both of the preceding mechanisms may be at work. In addition, peptide length is crucial; short peptides have an excellent amphipathic structure and potent antimicrobial activity.	Saad et al., 2021	
Black kidney bean protein hydrolysate	45 µg mL−1	Campylobacter jejuni NCTC 11168	Reacting with specific membrane components, such as anionic phospholipids and lipopolysaccharides, which break down the membrane and kills bacteria. The reaction may depend on the hydrophobicity of peptides by binding hydrophobic membrane groups. Additionally, peptides are deposited on the bilayer surface due to ionic/electrostatic interactions, resulting in membrane instability and disintegration. When peptides contain both hydrophobic and hydrophilic residues, a property known as amphipathicity, both of the preceding mechanisms may be at work. In addition, peptide length is crucial; short peptides have an excellent amphipathic structure and potent antimicrobial activity.	Saad et al., 2021	
D-Tryptophan	1000 µg mL−1	Campylobacter jejuni 180ip
Campylobacter jejuni 238ip	Reacting with specific membrane components, such as anionic phospholipids and lipopolysaccharides, which break down the membrane and kills bacteria. The reaction may depend on the hydrophobicity of peptides by binding hydrophobic membrane groups. Additionally, peptides are deposited on the bilayer surface due to ionic/electrostatic interactions, resulting in membrane instability and disintegration. When peptides contain both hydrophobic and hydrophilic residues, a property known as amphipathicity, both of the preceding mechanisms may be at work. In addition, peptide length is crucial; short peptides have an excellent amphipathic structure and potent antimicrobial activity.	Elgamoudi et al., 2020; Saad et al., 2021	
D-Serine	1000 µg mL−1	Campylobacter jejuni RC039
Campylobacter jejuni S-8	Reacting with specific membrane components, such as anionic phospholipids and lipopolysaccharides, which break down the membrane and kills bacteria. The reaction may depend on the hydrophobicity of peptides by binding hydrophobic membrane groups. Additionally, peptides are deposited on the bilayer surface due to ionic/electrostatic interactions, resulting in membrane instability and disintegration. When peptides contain both hydrophobic and hydrophilic residues, a property known as amphipathicity, both of the preceding mechanisms may be at work. In addition, peptide length is crucial; short peptides have an excellent amphipathic structure and potent antimicrobial activity.	Elgamoudi et al., 2020; Saad et al., 2021	
D-Alanine	1000 µg mL−1	Campylobacter jejuni RC039
Campylobacter jejuni S-8	Reacting with specific membrane components, such as anionic phospholipids and lipopolysaccharides, which break down the membrane and kills bacteria. The reaction may depend on the hydrophobicity of peptides by binding hydrophobic membrane groups. Additionally, peptides are deposited on the bilayer surface due to ionic/electrostatic interactions, resulting in membrane instability and disintegration. When peptides contain both hydrophobic and hydrophilic residues, a property known as amphipathicity, both of the preceding mechanisms may be at work. In addition, peptide length is crucial; short peptides have an excellent amphipathic structure and potent antimicrobial activity.	Elgamoudi et al., 2020; Saad et al., 2021	
D-Methionine	1000 µg mL−1	Campylobacter jejuni NCTC 11168
Campylobacter jejuni 180ip
Campylobacter jejuni 238ip	Reacting with specific membrane components, such as anionic phospholipids and lipopolysaccharides, which break down the membrane and kills bacteria. The reaction may depend on the hydrophobicity of peptides by binding hydrophobic membrane groups. Additionally, peptides are deposited on the bilayer surface due to ionic/electrostatic interactions, resulting in membrane instability and disintegration. When peptides contain both hydrophobic and hydrophilic residues, a property known as amphipathicity, both of the preceding mechanisms may be at work. In addition, peptide length is crucial; short peptides have an excellent amphipathic structure and potent antimicrobial activity.	Elgamoudi et al., 2020; Saad et al., 2021	
	
Probiotics derivatives	
	
Bacteriocin
Reuterin	32 µg mL−1
580 µg mL−1	Campylobacter jejuni
Campylobacter coli	DNA synthesis interfering with the membrane integrity of bacterial cells	Asare et al., 2020	
		Campylobacter jejuni
Campylobacter jejuni	DNA synthesis interfering with the membrane integrity of bacterial cells	Asare et al., 2020	
	
Glycolipid biosurfactant	
	

Sophorolipid	32 µg mL−1	Campylobacter jejuni subsp. jejuni
33560	Lysis of the cell membrane	Silveira et al., 2019	

EPIDEMIOLOGY OF CAMPYLOBACTER IN BROILER PRODUCTION

Avian Campylobacteriosis

Campylobacter can multiply in the gut epithelium of almost warm-blooded host species (Biswas et al., 2019; Barker et al., 2020). Poultry is the predominant host for Campylobacter spp., possibly due to their elevated body temperature (Kers et al., 2018; Tram et al., 2020; Beterams et al., 2023). Even while all commercial bird species may host Campylobacter spp., the risk is greater in chicken due to the massive volumes consumed (Ijaz et al., 2018; Dubovitskaya et al., 2023). Campylobacter is a commensal in broiler chickens that forms a benign condition with multiplication up to 1010 colony-forming units (CFU) g droppings−1 (Dhillon et al., 2006; Battersby et al., 2016). Campylobacter was collected from practically every area of the broiler's gut; however, it is instantly present in the caeca and cloaca, which do not attach to the villus epithelium but rather to the mucus coating the intestinal villi (Achen et al., 1998).

In contrast to the illness in humans, Campylobacter do not cause any lesion in chickens and cohabits with the lower gut in a commensal state (Ingresa-Capaccioni et al., 2016; Myintzaw et al., 2023). Histopathological investigations showed no pathological lesions or marked alteration in crypt features (Shaughnessy et al., 2011; Golz et al., 2020). Furthermore, multiplication persists, implying that immunity is inefficient in eradicating infection, at least in these conditions. At the same time, older birds, such as layers, may have had less colonization over time (Johannessen et al., 2020). In summary, this situation has enormous advantages for Campylobacter and no adverse consequences for the host (Beterams et al., 2023).

Campylobacter Colonization and Immunity

Ingestion of 35 CFU of Campylobacter was sufficient to induce multiplication in chicken tissues (Umar et al., 2016; Urdaneta et al., 2023). After ingestion, Campylobacter were directed to cecal and cloacal crypts, revealing an established Campylobacter multiplication for 24 h postintroduction (Coward et al., 2008). Campylobacter is rarely noticed in chicken below 2 to 3 wk old (van Gerwe et al., 2009). This young age-linked resistance (commonly called lag phase) expanded against various Campylobacter spp., which is not fully known (Sahin et al., 2002). Campylobacter specified maternal antibodies are predominant in chicken and might be included in this resistance (Šimunović et al., 2020). The high concentration of antibodies detected within the first 2 wk declines to negligible levels within 3 to 4 wk (Sahin et al., 2002; Šimunović et al., 2020).

In addition, the phase of intestinal growth was hypothesized to be included in this age-related resistance, as bird gut tissues undergo physiological modifications within the brooding time (van Der Wielen et al., 2000; Natsos et al., 2019). Alterations in the gut microbiota and competitive cecal microbiome (Mead, 2002) are also related to the lag stage and raising techniques, such as ration and medication changes that occur during the rearing period (Mead, 2002).

Chickens are easily colonized with Campylobacter due to their rapid reproduction (Bailey et al., 2019). Most (>95%) of the chickens of that flock are multiplied for days (Stern et al., 2001) and stay so until slaughter (Coward et al., 2008; Bailey et al., 2019). However, after 8 wk, colonization could lower the bacterial count and number of colonized chickens, accompanied by adaptive immunity and modification in the nutritious tract microbiome (Sahin et al., 2003a; Vandeplas et al., 2010).

However, no lesion was noticed with chicken colonization, and gut immunity to the disease was detected with elevated cytokine expression (Borrmann et al., 2007; Larson et al., 2008; Li et al., 2008) and toll-like receptor (TLR) activation (de Zoete et al., 2010). Campylobacter can stimulate both systemic and mucosal immunity in birds, as various research reported the presence of immune-accompanied gene and protein expression post-Campylobacter multiplication of birds (de Zoete et al., 2007).

However, it is still unknown how Campylobacter reacts with the bird's immune organs to excite immunity (Lin, 2009). Analysis of collected chicken samples showed increased cytokine expression (Smith et al., 2008) and circulating monocytes/macrophages (Meade et al., 2009; Pumtang-On et al., 2021). Various avian cells provoke or upregulate cytokines throughout in vitro challenges (Li et al., 2008). However, the chicken host's Campylobacter-specific antibody response was slow and moderate since the infection did not cause obvious intestinal inflammation or cell death (Lin, 2009; Gorain et al., 2020). In some investigations, Campylobacter was also recovered from the thymus, bursa of Fabricius, reproductive tract, spleen, hepatic tissue, and blood in chicken, supposing that Campylobacter may attack gut tissue and induce systemic reaction (Meade et al., 2009; Nothaft et al., 2021).

Recent research established that C. jejuni could attach to and enter the villi of birds in vitro and in vivo. However, the C. jejuni strains that attack chicken epithelium tissues could not colonize intracellularly but rapidly escape from the cells (Byrne et al., 2007). Thus, Van Deun et al. (2008) supposed a new multiplication procedure of C. jejuni by evading short-term clearance via fast epithelial invasion and then evasion, with rapid multiplication in the mucus. Other studies have demonstrated that chicken immunity may be ineffectively stimulated upon Campylobacter multiplication, and expression of different antimicrobial peptide genes may be lowered (Hermans et al., 2012; Gorain et al., 2020). All these remarks may suggest that C. jejuni is correctly acclimatized to the avian host, and bacteria can be considered a commensal gut microbiota. This fact may contribute to the continuous multiplication of Campylobacter in the bird's alimentary tract (Gorain et al., 2020). Campylobacter colonization and bird immune response against the infection with campylobacteriosis are expressed in Figure 2.Figure 2 Campylobacter colonization and bird immune response against the infection with campylobacteriosis. At the first 3 wk of age, the bird has a protective level of maternal antibodies against Campylobacter. After this age, the bird ingests contaminated food with Campylobacter. The bacteria then invade intestinal epithelium and mucosa stimulating excess mucous secretion and activation of toll-like receptors. The bird immunity stimulates cytokines, circulating monocytes, and macrophage expression.

Figure 2

Broiler Production and Campylobacter Jejuni

The different mechanisms of Campylobacter transmission in chickens are summarized in Figure 3.Figure 3 The mechanisms of Campylobacter transmission in chickens. (A) Contaminated feed, water, and utensils at the farm level. (B) Carnivorous, especially dogs and cats. (C) Human movement between different farms with contaminated utensils. (D) During birds’ transportation from previously contaminated cages or contaminated environments. (E) At slaughterhouses level during bird evisceration and processing with previously contaminated machines. (F) Insects and (G) rodents (insects and rodents can transmit infection during all stages of bird rearing, transportation, slaughtering, processing, and handling).

Figure 3

Infection With Campylobacter During the Rearing Period (at the Farm Level)

Independent farmers grow broiler chickens until the birds reach the market weight, which takes about 6 to 7 wk. During the grow-out and processing stages, Campylobacter can enter the production chain and contaminate either flock on the farm or carcasses at the processing area. C. jejuni is commensal in broilers due to the absence of inflammatory reactions induced by C. jejuni colonization and the failure of chickens to clear C. jejuni out from the intestines (National Chicken Council, 2019). Because of this, there are no clinical indications linked with the multiplication of C. jejuni in broilers (Salem et al., 2019; Abd El-Hack et al., 2021a).

In broilers, C. jejuni multiplication takes place in the lower gastrointestinal tissue. It is thought to persist in the intestine by undergoing fast replication in the mucus after invasion and evasion from the cecal crypt, thereby avoiding expulsion from the intestine (Van Deun et al., 2008; Wysok et al., 2020). Broilers can harbor high concentrations up to 109 CFU of C. jejuni g cecal matter−1 (Beery et al.,1988). Once C. jejuni enters a farm, the whole flock is expected to become colonized by C. jejuni in a few days (Newell and Fearnley, 2003; Gorain et al., 2020). However, several studies pointed out that not all chickens become colonized with Campylobacter within a positive flock, and colonization levels may vary broadly within flocks (Hansson et al., 2004, 2007, 2010). The multiplication of C. jejuni in broilers is not observed until 2 to 3 wk of broiler age (Shange et al., 2019). Because the timing of colonization coincides with maternal immunity, maternal antibodies may protect broilers from C. jejuni multiplication at a young age (Sahin et al., 2001; Singh et al., 2019).

Furthermore, as broilers age, there is a decrease in Campylobacter shedding (Dipineto et al., 2011). Dipineto et al. (2011) revealed that Campylobacter multiplication lowered over time in laying hens, resulting in some birds being free of Campylobacter (Dipineto et al., 2011; Taha-Abdelaziz et al., 2018). This finding provides support for the hypothesis that age-related improvements in immunity and gut bacterial stability contribute to the more obvious Campylobacter colonization in older birds (Taha-Abdelaziz et al., 2018). Figure 4 provides a concise summary of the various modes of transmission of the Campylobacter infection.Figure 4 Transmission of Campylobacter disease hypothesis. True vertical transmission via female reproductive tract or contaminated roosters’ semen. False vertical transmission via contaminated eggs and the bacteria penetrates the eggshell. Horizontal transmission from infected bird to susceptible bird.

Figure 4

The potential of the vertical route of transmission of Campylobacter in broilers was studied extensively (Callicott et al., 2006; Vandeputte et al., 2019). Shanker et al. (1986) discovered that unless C. jejuni was directly injected into albumin, natural colonization did not occur, even when C. jejuni-challenged eggshells were used. In addition, a number of investigations have failed to differentiate the identical genotypes of C. jejuni in parent farms and their chicken offspring (Petersen et al., 2001; Vandeputte et al., 2020). The presence of anti-Campylobacter antibodies in the mother reduces both the vertical transmission and proliferation of the bacteria in newly hatched chickens (Sahin et al., 2001).

Campylobacter is most commonly spread from one flock of broilers to another through horizontal transmission (Gregory et al., 1997). There has been a significant amount of epidemiological research done to shed light on the identification of origins of Campylobacter in bird farms, and various possible sources have been found. These sources reported are insects (Dale et al., 2015), rodents (Hiett et al., 2002a,b,c; Gorain et al., 2020), wild birds (Hald et al., 2016), other livestock and avian farms (Zweifel et al., 2008), the environment around and within the poultry farm (e.g., soil, puddle, and drinking water) (Messens et al., 2009), and residual Campylobacter population from previous flocks (Hald et al., 2016; Taha-Abdelaziz et al., 2018).

Despite numerous attempts, researchers have been unable to differentiate Campylobacter from other possible sources until after the flock had been infested (Vandeputte et al., 2019). This failure could be because 1) many research had inadequate study design and sampling schemes, 2) previous studies failed to identify unknown sources of Campylobacter around and within the poultry farm, 3) Current laboratory techniques are incapable of reviving and cultivating Campylobacter in the VBNC state, or 4) the current genotyping techniques are not sensitive enough to differentiate Campylobacter strains due to high frequency of DNA recombination observed in Campylobacter genome (Agunos et al., 2014; Vandeputte et al., 2019).

Depending on the investigations that were conducted to determine the origins of the outbreak, multiple on-farm danger agents together with Campylobacter colonization in broiler farms have been found (Natsos et al., 2019). The majority of these risk factors are associated with poor biosecurity and hygiene standards in the chicken house (Chowdhury et al., 2012; Natsos et al., 2019). The failure to sanitize drinking water, the absence of anteroom and boot dips, and the absence of adequate pest treatments all contribute to the easy access that natural Campylobacter reservoirs have to the farm (Bailey et al., 2019).

Some other on-farm risk factors include the time of year (summer vs. other season) (Ellis-Iversen et al., 2012; Bailey et al., 2019), the practice of reusing litter (Sandberg et al., 2015), the length of the downtime period (the time between flocks when the broiler houses are cleaned and disinfected) (Sommer et al., 2016), the routine of thinning practice (Näther et al., 2009; Pumtang-On et al., 2021; Taha-Abdelaziz et al., 2023), general conditions of broiler farms (Chowdhury et al., 2012), and broilers age (Chowdhury et al., 2012).

Campylobacter Incidence in Broiler Chickens

The incidence in commercial broiler farms differs mostly according to the age of the animals (Koutsoumanis et al., 2020; Elhelw et al., 2022). Under the commercial system, Campylobacter is hardly detected in broilers 1 to 3 wk of age, but newly born chicken can be in vitro challenged with C. jejuni (Sahin et al., 2001). Campylobacter infection is commonly noticed post the third week of age for most commercial farms. While some chicken become infected, C. jejuni spreads throughout the rest of the farm and stays there until slaughter, polluting the meat in the processing facilities (Shreeve et al., 2000; Nothaft et al., 2021).

C. jejuni is most commonly seen in commercial birds, and as many as 100% of broilers at slaughter may be infected (Deng et al., 2020). Results from a European union survey in member states to evaluate the incidence of Campylobacter in broilers revealed a mean prevalence of 71.2% (95% confidence intervals: 68.5; 73.7), with results varying from 2% (Estonia) to 100% (Luxembourg). The median member states prevalence of Campylobacter-colonized broiler batches was 57.1% (EFSA and ECDC, 2021a,b).

In addition, results from the European summary report on trends and sources of zoonoses, zoonotic agents, and foodborne outbreaks in 2014 reported an overall prevalence of Campylobacter in fresh broiler flesh collected at slaughter, processing, and retail of 38.4% of the 6,703 examined units (EFSA and ECDC, 2015). Different recording member states had very different rates of Campylobacter-positive chicken meat samples. Campylobacter was found in 35.5% of single samples at retail, and 6 of the 11 member states that took samples at retail found that less than 50% of them were positive. At the slaughterhouse level, Campylobacter was found in 44.4% of the single samples that were checked (EFSA and ECDC, 2015).

Birds' Campylobacter shedding rates fluctuate throughout the year, with summer seeing the highest rates (Wedderkopp et al., 2000). However, C. jejuni is prevalent in broilers, and some flocks remain Campylobacter-negative during their raising period (Stern et al., 2001; Gorain et al., 2020). Campylobacter is prevalent in organic and free-range chicken flocks (Heuer et al., 2001; Clavijo and Florez, 2018), suggesting that all manufacture techniques are susceptible to Campylobacter infection.

Broiler Farms: Potential Sources of Contamination and Risk Factors

Campylobacter potential origins and transmission routes in bird farms have been widely investigated. However, no apparent factor(s) has been discovered to explain the organism's prevalence in commercial avian farms (Higham et al., 2018; Chintoan-Uta et al., 2020). According to numerous studies, the most likely cause of C. jejuni infection in chickens is horizontal dissemination from the surrounding environment (O'Mahony et al., 2011). Possible sources include old litter (Thakur et al., 2013), untreated drinking water (Zimmer et al., 2003), other farm animals or domestic pets (Ellis-Iversen et al., 2009, 2012), insects (Hazeleger et al., 2008), rodents (McDowell et al., 2008), instruments, and transport vehicles and farm laborers (Ridley et al., 2008; Sibanda et al., 2018).

Due to extreme sensitivity to oxygen and moisture, Campylobacter cannot thrive in the natural environment (Singh et al., 2019). Campylobacter is seldom found in fresh litter or feed testing before birds become ill (Thakur et al., 2013). Campylobacter is a bacterium that may be spread from contaminated used litter to agricultural settings (Montrose et al., 1985). Due to frequent cleaning, disinfection, and the replacement of litter between flocks, litter is seldom a cause of contamination in EU broiler production (Evans, 1992). Furthermore, in the USA, national epidemiologic studies found no significant variations in the prevalence and onset of Campylobacter among flocks on different grow-out farms employing different litter utilization practices (Stern et al., 2001). Cattle, swine, and other poultry have all been found to serve as important reservoirs for Campylobacter (Lyngstad et al., 2008; Vandeputte et al., 2019).

Molecular epidemiological research on farm animals has shown that strains spreading to bird flocks are sometimes discovered alongside other livestock, such as cows and swine (Korsak et al., 2015; Di Giannatale et al., 2019; Ito and Kishimoto, 2023). In longitudinal investigations, the route of transfer from the animals to the broilers may be seen before avian flock multiplication (Katsma et al., 2007). Removing other livestock from a chicken farm will only lower infection by 41 to 44% (Katsma et al., 2007). However, this appears to be a rather infrequent event (Johnsen et al., 2006; Vandeputte et al., 2020), and most of the strains discovered near cattle are not detected later in broilers. In addition, domestic animals such as dogs and cats were seen to harbor on a regular basis (Vandeputte et al., 2020). They shed C. coli and C. jejuni and have been identified as a risk agent of Campylobacter disease in broiler farms (Torralbo et al., 2014; Hwang and Singer, 2020).

Insects, like beetles, flies, may act as mechanical vectors for Campylobacter transmission from livestock to chickens (Hald et al., 2008). Shane et al. (1985) was the first to demonstrate Campylobacter transmission by flies across chicken flocks in a controlled laboratory setting. Hald et al. (2004) showed that C. jejuni was mainly transported by house flies from animals to the broiler farms via ventilation inlets. Furthermore, flies may have a linking effect in Campylobacter epidemiology, since several studies have proven the influence of hygiene barriers and fly screens in reducing the prevalence of Campylobacter spp., between farms of broiler chickens (Bahrndorff et al., 2013; Gölz et al., 2018). However, the role of flies as a key cause of Campylobacter infection in broilers was controversial (Gölz et al., 2018).

Although some Campylobacter serotypes and genotypes were found from insects and broilers on farms, the path of spread was unclear (Bailey et al., 2019). Prior to the positive confirmation of Campylobacter in the broilers, it was unusual for insects to test positive in a chicken farm, suggesting that insects are not the predominant source of Campylobacter in a broiler farm (Nesbit et al., 2001). The larvae of darkling beetles have also been linked to the transmission of C. jejuni between breeding populations (Refrégier-Petton et al., 2001).

There is also evidence that rats and mice can spread Campylobacter (Arsenault et al., 2007; McDowell et al., 2008; Newell et al., 2011). In addition, there have been reports of rodents in certain contemporary poultry farms (Evans and Sayers, 2000). This threat may be minimal because Campylobacter carriage is seldom identified in trapped rats (Vandeputte et al., 2020). The risk of Campylobacter being introduced to poultry farms through the hands of a farm worker is high (Ridley et al., 2008; Hakeem et al., 2021). Humans providing poultry through a nonsterile environment increase the risk of Campylobacter multiplication, as shown by Johnsen et al. (2006).

Campylobacter may spread easily from the outside environment into the avian farm, and human traffic is a major vector for this pathogen (Cardinale et al., 2004; Hofshagen and Kruse, 2005). Another study by Hansson et al. (2010) confirmed the importance of agricultural workers following thorough hygiene protocols and using appropriate hygiene. There is a clear correlation between the number of agricultural employees and the number of tourists and the prevalence of Campylobacter infections (Huneau-Salaun et al., 2007).

Campylobacter was isolated from the hands, boots, and clothing of agricultural workers, catchers, and managers, as well as truck drivers (Ramabu et al., 2004). Human visitors to the avian home may bring Campylobacter in from the outside ecosystem, since molecular epidemiology shows that these strains are commonly followed by flock expansion (Ridley et al., 2008, 2011). Workers in the agricultural sector may not be the only ones concerned about the spread of Campylobacter in the birdhouse. The most recent European baseline assessment of Campylobacter in bird farms confirms the widespread belief that thinning or partial depopulation is a significant risk factor for infectious disease (EFSA, 2010; Kittler et al., 2021a). Many catching crews work for poultry companies. Like workers, they move from one farm to another with their trucks, tools, boots, and clothes, often without caring about their own hygiene (Harris et al., 2021; Malavi et al., 2021).

Both the sources of drinking water and the treatment procedure can have an effect on the proliferation of Campylobacter (Zimmer et al., 2003). Ogden et al. (2007) used multilocus sequence typing (MLST) to discover C. jejuni sequence types in water tanks and broiler houses, providing more evidence that water is likely a source of infection in broilers. In addition to finding C. coli in groundwater, Pérez-Boto et al. (2010) concluded that drinking water was a potential source of C. coli on bird farms. Even though Campylobacter has been found in water systems, whether or not this indicates recent fecal contamination from cattle or wild birds is still up for debate (Zimmer et al., 2003).

Drinking water in avian dwellings is often positive after chickens have been grown, raising questions about the potential significance of this source in introducing Campylobacter into avian environments (Nothaft et al., 2021). Consequently, the contaminated water does not support the growth of Campylobacter; rather, it only serves as a passive channel for the bacteria to spread (Sahin et al., 2002). Water treatments with disinfectants may prevent Campylobacter from accessing a farm rather than spreading within a livestock (Ellis-Iversen et al., 2009).

Campylobacter may also be introduced to poultry farms by a vertical pathway, from the hen to the egg to the fowl (Takeshita et al., 2021). The possibility that Campylobacter may be transmitted from birds' eggs to the next generation was, nevertheless, examined. Researchers have noted the potential for Campylobacter to be transmitted from birds to humans through contaminated egg products (Takeshita et al., 2021). Campylobacter was successfully found in 10% of 275 semen samples from commercial broiler breeder roosters, with quantities as high as 1,000 CFU mL−1, as reported by Cox et al. (2002b). Furthermore, Campylobacter has been detected in the oviducts and other reproductive organs of breeder chickens (Hiett et al., 2002a; Cox et al., 2005; Natsos et al., 2019). Campylobacter may survive in the moist membranes of eggshells. The chicken may eat the bacterium as soon as it pips and emerges from the egg, becoming infected and spreading it to other chickens in the flock through its cecal droppings (Tang et al., 2020). It is hypothesized that Campylobacter can be transmitted from one generation of broilers to the next via the egg, which becomes contaminated with droppings as it travels through the cloaca (Allen and Griffiths, 2001; Cox et al., 2012; Marotta et al., 2015; Tang et al., 2020).

Cox et al. (2002a) detected ribotypes and flaA short-variable-region alleles in a commercial broiler breeder flock and its progeny broiler flock, providing molecular evidence of the occurrence of vertical transmission. Further evidence that Campylobacter might be present in chicken before to transit to the farm comes from the finding of amplifiable Campylobacter DNA in samples taken from hatchery fluff, a gut of developing embryos, and newly hatched chicken (Thibodeau et al., 2015).

On the other hand, Dion et al. (2020) concluded that while vertical transmission between breeders and broilers is necessary, it is infrequent and poses little threat to commercial farms. Newell and Fearnley (2003) observed that the vertical spread of C. jejuni is unusual because of a constant lag stage in recognizing C. jejuni multiplication in birds. However, Campylobacter may be present in the hatching chicken in very low numbers, and factors such as maternal antibodies keep the population from expanding too rapidly (Sahin et al., 2003a). This is supported by the fact that, when using standard culture methods, many laboratories have been unable to identify Campylobacter in day-old chicks (Herman et al., 2003; Mazengia et al., 2015).

The ability to reliably isolate Campylobacter from a variety of biological and dietary samples is presently unavailable because to the lack of a suitable culture technique. Most culture methods were developed to isolate Campylobacter from highly contaminated feces (Taha-Abdelaziz et al., 2018). However, these techniques may not identify Campylobacter in foods or biological materials if the quantity of cells is minimal, the cells are sublethally injured or stressed, or if they are living but cannot be cultured (Taha-Abdelaziz et al., 2018).

It has been hypothesized by Agunos et al. (2014) that a major roadblock in studying Campylobacter in broilers is the difficulty to cultivate the bacteria from younger birds (>2 wk old). There is still a significant prejudice against the assumption that viable eggs might generate Campylobacter infection in breeder and broiler farms due to the inability to grow Campylobacter. The evidence that there are other modes of egg transmission than the traditional transovarial route has been largely ignored by previous investigations (Cox et al., 2012; Gorain et al., 2020).

Campylobacter Contamination of Broiler Flocks During Transport and Slaughter

Transport from farm to processing plant, live haul, bleeding, scalding, plucking (defeathering), evisceration, and chilling are the traditional primary processing stages for broiler chickens (Barbut, 2016). There is a high probability of intra- and intercongregational Campylobacter infection during the transportation of a flock from the farm to the processing plant (Slader et al., 2002; Hansson et al., 2005). According to epidemiological study, insufficient cleaning and disinfection of transportation modules and trucks can lead to Campylobacter-negative birds becoming contaminated with persistent Campylobacter observed on this equipment during transit, since the surface of broilers has the potential to get contaminated with Campylobacter (Shang et al., 2018; Karki et al., 2019; Rasschaert et al., 2020).

Thinning is a prevalent practice in European countries when a subset of a flock is slaughtered early or late to satisfy varied market weight standards. Without adequate biosecurity measures being taken during the capture and transportation of broiler chickens, there is a considerable increase in the danger of introducing Campylobacter to the remaining broilers (Newell et al., 2011). Campylobacter concentrations on carcasses are known to fluctuate widely throughout the various stages of processing. While it may be challenging to eliminate all Campylobacter from carcasses during processing, it is possible to significantly reduce the amount of Campylobacter present (Newell et al., 2011). However, there is also a chance that harmful carcasses will be cross-contaminated. Scalding, plucking, and eviscerating are practices that are known to increase the spread of foodborne pathogens (Berrang et al., 2011; Nothaft et al., 2021). Scalding entails immersing carcasses in hot water to open feather follicles and allow feathers to be easily removed during the harvesting process. The defeathering phase occurs prior to the evisceration stage and entails the removal of feathers and the top layer of the integument (USDA-FSIS, 2008).

Feathers with a high concentration of feces can contaminate slaughterhouse scalding tanks and spread disease to meat (Singh et al., 2019). When picking fingertips rub against carcasses, feces can be released, resulting in cross-contamination between carcasses (Berrang et al., 2001; Vandeputte et al., 2019). Evisceration is a technique that eliminates internal viscera and any processing errors from carcasses before chilling. Because high levels of Campylobacter are commonly found in broiler chicken intestines, rupturing the intestine can release Campylobacter, contaminating carcasses (Izat et al., 1988). Carcasses are tested for contamination and reprocessed if any is found. It has been shown, however, that reprocessing does not always reduce bacterial levels in carcasses (Fletcher et al., 1997). It is critical to avoid both indirect contact between contaminated and uncontaminated carcasses and the release of Campylobacter from contaminated carcasses. Reducing Campylobacter levels on carcasses and minimizing cross-contamination throughout each processing step requires the use of appropriate antimicrobial and sanitary techniques. Frequently rinsing the processing equipment is recommended by USDA-FSIS (2015) to prevent the accumulation of contaminants and bacteria.

Chloride and peroxides are two examples of antimicrobial agents that could be added to chilling tanks and washing water to prevent the growth of bacteria (USDA-FSIS, 2015; Bailey et al., 2019). It is also recommended to use countercurrent water flow so that carcasses are gradually exposed to cleaner water (Buhr et al., 2014). Another recommended technique is maintaining a healthy pH in water tanks to prevent the establishment of Campylobacter and other foodborne bacteria (USDA-FSIS, 2015). Lastly, it has been established that less contamination of one carcass by another can be achieved through better machine and equipment maintenance (USDA-FSIS, 2015).

Potential Risks During and Just Prior to Transport and Slaughter

When they are approximately 6 wk old, broilers are placed in crates, transported, and then processed at the butchery. Movement, crowding, temperature changes, and lack of water and food all contribute to the high levels of stress that animals experience during travel (Mainali et al., 2009; Dogan et al., 2019). Stress during transport from the farm to the processing facility disrupts gastrointestinal function, lowers an animal's resistance, and promotes the spread of gastrointestinal bacteria (Klančnik et al., 2013). Transportation stress has been linked to a 1,000-fold increase in bacterial populations on carcasses (Altekruse et al., 1999). Pollution levels could rise and Campylobacter could be introduced to wild farms if crates are not properly cleaned (Stern et al., 2001; Ridley et al., 2011). Even after cleaning and disinfecting, the contents of transport boxes are still microbiologically contaminated, even though the boxes have a clean outward appearance (Gorain et al., 2020). Some studies found that, even after cleaning and disinfecting, 60 and 71% of the transport crates examined were positive for Campylobacter (Rasschaert et al., 2007, 2020).

Furthermore, 80% of chicken farmers do not sterilize containers, and only 18.3% clean trucks and trailers properly, according to a survey conducted by Auburn University, USA among more than 10,000 poultry enterprises of varying sizes (O'Mahony et al., 2011; Nothaft et al., 2021). Frequent detection of organic residue on truck crates after washing indicates that the sanitizing process is ineffective and the germs are able to survive (O'Mahony et al., 2011). Consequently, the transmission in these contaminated crates may cause external contamination in Campylobacter-negative birds (Hansson et al., 2005; Rasschaert et al., 2020). Genotypes recovered from sanitized containers were also discovered on the carcasses of slaughtered chickens after shipment and slaughter (Vandeputte et al., 2019). According to Schroeder et al. (2014), the concentration of these pathogens on the surface of birds correlates with the concentrations found on thoroughly processed carcasses. Therefore, it is crucial to reduce the farm prevalence of these pathogens and transport stress throughout the process in order to lower the risk of contaminated meat products entering the food chain (Vandeputte et al., 2019).

Risk Factors During Slaughter, Dressing, and Processing

Using data from 2008, the European Food Safety Authorities were able to estimate the prevalence of Campylobacter and Salmonella-contaminated broiler carcasses across the community and in each EU member state, and they released those findings in 2010 (EFSA and ECDC, 2021b). The investigation centered on birds entering the food chain at the level of broiler batches in slaughterhouses (Thames and Sukumaran, 2020; Lindqvist et al., 2022). Campylobacter contamination of broiler carcasses was studied on a national scale by analyzing the contamination rate, sample size, and concentration of slaughterhouses. Carcass samples from 9,324 broiler batches were analyzed for Campylobacter in the European Union (Bertram et al., 2019). An increase in Campylobacter in the intestine's points to the possibility of contamination of bird carcasses during slaughter, most likely due to the spillage of droppings during defeathering and evisceration and the spread of disease in the slaughterhouse environment (Hakeem et al., 2020).

However, the European Union has yet to adopt the use of Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Points Programs (HACCP) to reduce Campylobacter contamination of meat carcasses (EFSA and ECDC, 2015; Giangaspero, 2018). Campylobacter is transported to the corpses during the slaughtering process, and the load may decrease during scalding, cooling, and freezing while increasing during defeathering and disemboweling (Gonzalez-Fandos et al., 2020). There have been multiple studies looking at how scalding affects Campylobacter contamination of carcasses. However, there have been reports of contrasting findings (Gonzalez-Fandos et al., 2020).

However, scalding has been identified by some research as a possible source of Campylobacter cross-contamination. The pathogen was found in scald tank water before the first birds arrived, indicating that contamination persists even after cleanliness measures have been taken (Schroeder et al., 2014; Perez-Arnedo and Gonzalez-Fandos, 2019). Scald tank water had an average of 2.90 CFU mL−1 of C. jejuni (Osiriphun et al., 2012). Thus, even after the tank was thoroughly cleaned, some Campylobacter remained. Previous research has documented the bacterium's ability to survive in this setting (Rahimi et al., 2010). The attachment of the Campylobacter to the broiler skin may be aided by the feather follicles in the integument, which are thought to shield the Campylobacter and prevent the loss of stratum corneum at high scalding temperatures (Chantarapanont et al., 2004; Vandeputte et al., 2020).

Campylobacter spp. are particularly well-adapted to life on the skin of broilers, where they can thrive in organic biofilms. Furthermore, the temperature in subcutis is frequently 3°C to 4°C lower than the scalding temperature (Yang et al., 2001). Similarly, Ellerbroek et al. (2010) found that scalding had no effect on the eradication of Campylobacter, even though the postscalding isolation rate was 91.1%. However, it has been reported that the total number of bacteria on skin carcasses decreases after scalding (Guerin et al., 2010; Lawes et al., 2012). Berrang et al. (2007) found a mean reduction of 0.43 log CFU after chilling, while Guerin et al. (2010) found the largest reduction of 2.9 CFU postscalding and 1.7 CFU after chilling. Campylobacter contamination has also been prevalent during the defeathering process (Duffy et al., 2014; Vandeputte et al., 2020).

Previous research has indicated that the disembowelment process may greatly enhance the cross-contamination of Campylobacter due to the shattering of internal organs and stomach contents (Seliwiorstow et al., 2015; Da Rosa et al., 2021). Droppings are expelled from the cloaca by the selector's fingers pressing on the abdomen during defeathering, resulting in high broiler carcass and slaughter equipment contamination (Mendes et al., 2020). Furthermore, the surface of the finger becomes rough with use, allowing bacteria to colonize the crevices on the surface of the rubber finger and multiply overnight if not adequately disinfected. This results in cross-contamination between flocks as bacteria on the rubber fingers are transferred to the corpses during the subsequent defeathering (Golden and Mishra, 2020). There has been no recent agreement on the trend in Campylobacter counts following evisceration, and Rosenquist et al. (2006) observed an increase in Campylobacter populations following evisceration. However, other authors reported a decrease (Reich et al., 2008; Taha-Abdelaziz et al., 2018) or no difference in Campylobacter numbers postevisceration (Berrang and Dickens, 2000; Zhang et al., 2020).

Processing facilities have various options for chilling corpses to lower their temperature (Berrang et al., 2008; Zeiger et al., 2017). Meat that has been immersed in cold water has a significantly lower Campylobacter counts than air-chilled meat (Berrang et al., 2008; Lee et al., 2017). Sanitizers like chlorine are used in some immersion chill tanks to help reduce contaminants like blood and tissue fragments (Guerin et al., 2010; Urdaneta et al., 2023). Chlorine use in the chill tank has been shown to significantly reduce the amount of Campylobacter but not completely remove bacteria (Berrang et al., 2007). Samples of water from the chill tank were found to contain Campylobacter, which suggests that this is the most likely source of cross-contamination (Lindblad et al., 2006; Vandeputte et al., 2019).

Pollution of Campylobacter can occur in uncontaminated carcasses brought to the chill tank, although extensively contaminated carcasses will have less bacteria when they are removed from the tank. However, the elimination of Campylobacter from the surface of the carcass through immersion freezing does not prevent cross-contamination (Bashor et al., 2004; Bailey et al., 2019). Chilling air has been shown to have either no microbiological effects (Vandeputte et al., 2019) or just minor effects (Bailey et al., 2019) on Campylobacter levels.

One final important consideration for this pathogen is the possibility of cross-contamination during manufacture. Close contact between carcasses and equipment results in the accumulation of tissue fragments harboring Campylobacter, which in turn contaminate succeeding carcasses (Oh et al., 2018; Nothaft et al., 2021). Furthermore, there is a risk of cross-contamination between bird carcasses when their outer surfaces come into contact with one another, with personnel hands, and with trimming mesh gloves and knives (Furukawa et al., 2017; Zhong et al., 2020). Slaughterhouse workers become vectors for the development of these diseases as soon as they come into contact with livestock (Myintzaw et al., 2020). Ellerbroek et al. (2010) discovered that processing instruments and laborers are a source of cross-contamination, and that Campylobacter can be found on staff's hands, slaughtering implements, and transport crates. Many researchers have also observed cross-contamination between batches from different flocks, as well as contamination of noninfected batches from previously slaughtered batches (Ellerbroek et al., 2010). Specifically, the first carcasses of subsequent negative batches are contaminated by Campylobacter-positive batches, as reported by Hue et al. (2010). Aerosols and droplets created by excessive washing during the hanging, defeathering, and evisceration stages of slaughter may also contribute to the spread of disease (Peyrat et al., 2008).

Campylobacter Jejuni as a Human Foodborne Disease

In affluent countries, Campylobacter is a common cause of acute gastroenteritis (Lynch et al., 2022). Figure 5, Figure 6 provide a summary of the avian reservoirs of human Campylobacter infections and the associated human symptoms. Campylobacteriosis is mostly caused by C. jejuni and is frequently encountered in solitary instances. However, campylobacteriosis outbreaks have previously been observed (Lahti et al., 2017; Šimunovi´c et al., 2022). Most people infected with campylobacteriosis either show no symptoms or experience only moderate ones, including diarrhea (which may or may not be bloody), nausea, fever, and abdominal pain (Allos, 2001). These moderate clinical manifestations can last for up to a week without demanding special antibiotic treatments or alternatives such as probiotics (ISO, 2017a; Neijat et al., 2019).Figure 5 Avian sources of Campylobacter infection in humans. This can be through contaminated eggs, chicken meat, and chicken meat products. The related symptoms in humans including abdominal pain, diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, fever, blood in stool, spams, and weight loss.

Figure 5

Figure 6 Campylobacter infection sources in humans. Consumption of contaminated water; contact with infected farm animals, pets, or wild birds; consumption of contaminated milk, eggs, meat; consumption of undercooked or raw chicken or chicken products; and contact of diseased human with susceptible person.

Figure 6

Pancreatitis, peritoneal inflammation, bacteremia, reactive arthritis, and Guillain-Barré syndrome are only some of the more serious complications that could arise, with potentially devastating results (Ahmed et al., 2018). The precise mechanism by which an infection with Campylobacter brings about these long-term effects is unclear. The estimated incidence of campylobacteriosis in the USA is 14 cases per 100,000 people (CDC, 2019). In 2015, 13 deaths were attributed to Campylobacter infections, with 6,289 confirmed cases recorded by the Food Net surveillance system in the USA (CDC, 2017). The true incidence of campylobacteriosis is estimated to be 9 million cases annually in Europe due to the disease's asymptomatic character (Facciolà et al., 2017; ISO, 2017b).

Campylobacteriosis cases are most common in July and August, which coincides with the peak season for isolating Campylobacter from chickens and other fowl in industrialized countries (Sibanda et al., 2018). In contrast, campylobacteriosis is common and mild in third-world nations, where the vast majority of infections are asymptomatic (Platts-Mills and Kosek, 2014). Campylobacteriosis is estimated to be more prevalent in developing countries (Kaakoush et al., 2015). In a self-inflicted experiment, Robinson (1981) demonstrated that as little as 500 C. jejuni cells were sufficient to cause diarrhea and stomach pain, suggesting that the infective dose of C. jejuni is low. Similarly, investigations in healthy adults demonstrated that exposure to 800 to 105 CFU of C. jejuni could result in clinical symptoms (Tribble et al., 2010).

In addition, several experimental tests demonstrated that greater doses resulted in a higher frequency of attacks (Tribble et al., 2010; Weerasooriya et al., 2022). C. jejuni has an estimated incubation time of 2 to 4 d, while infections caused by more potent strains tend to have shorter incubation periods (Tribble et al., 2010). Campylobacteriosis is usually self-limiting, therefore patients recover without special therapy in most cases (Silva et al., 2011). Electrolyte and fluid replacement is suggested for mild cases (Vandeputte et al., 2019). Antibiotics may be advised for severe instances, particularly in vulnerable groups such as the young, the old, and those with impaired immune systems (Pacanowski et al., 2008; Pumtang-On et al., 2021; Abd El-Hack et al., 2022a; Taha-Abdelaziz et al., 2023).

Macrolides are a commonly used antibiotic for treating campylobacteriosis, especially in children when fluoroquinolones cannot be used (Pacanowski et al., 2008; Gorain et al., 2020). Many investigators of disease etiology have concluded that the most significant risk factor for campylobacteriosis is the ingestion or handling of raw or undercooked avian products (Rodrigues et al., 2001; Domingues et al., 2012). Avian spp. is the most important source of Campylobacter in humans due to the high levels of colonization they can maintain and the rising global consumption of avian items (Ramakrishnan et al., 2019; Kittler et al., 2021b).

Campylobacteriosis is caused by several factors, including consuming raw dairy products (Domingues et al., 2012), coming into contact with animals or pets, swimming in polluted water (Ravel et al., 2016; Campagnolo et al., 2018), and consuming untreated water (Domingues et al., 2012; Ravel et al., 2016). Travel to third-world countries may be responsible for a significant number of cases of USA campylobacteriosis, according to research by Ricotta et al. (2014). In the yr 2005 to 2011, international travel was linked to approximately 18% of campylobacteriosis cases in the USA. Antibiotic-resistant Campylobacter was more likely to be the source of these infections than common Campylobacter (Ricotta et al., 2014).

Reducing Campylobacter contamination in avian goods is seen as an effective technique for reducing the public health burden of campylobacteriosis in people, as chicken is the primary source of sporadic campylobacteriosis (Hankel et al., 2022). The success of countries like Iceland and New Zealand in drastically reducing campylobacteriosis rates shows that this disease is complex and requires a wide range of approaches (Sears et al., 2011; Tustin et al., 2011). There was a nationwide outbreak of campylobacteriosis in Iceland in 1998, just 1 yr after the disease was made reportable (Tustin et al., 2011; Hankel et al., 2022).

Within 4 yr, the campylobacteriosis rate increased from 12.2 to 116 per 100,000 people, and the increase was blamed on the accessibility of fresh poultry products (Stern et al., 2003). Control measures in the food production chain include a number of activities implemented at different stages (Sakaridis et al., 2018; Béjaoui et al., 2022). To reduce the amount of viable Campylobacter on items sold to the public, pre- and postharvest surveillance and monitoring systems were put in place, and goods from farms that tested positive for Campylobacter were mandated to be frozen before being sold (García-Sánchez et al., 2017, 2018; Gorain et al., 2020). Producer education initiatives improved the biosecurity measures taken on farms and the general cleanliness of farms and processing plants (Tustin et al., 2011; Eriksson et al., 2023).

Campylobacter awareness and safe food handling and preparation practices have been the subject of consumer education efforts (Stern et al., 2003; Tustin et al., 2011). Campylobacteriosis cases dropped by 72% in Iceland after these measures were taken (Wagenaar et al., 2013). New Zealand had a 54% decrease in the average prevalence of campylobacteriosis after implementing similar measures that targeted both pre- and postharvest sectors as well as retail and consumers (Sears et al., 2011). Even though the decline in these two countries is remarkable, it is unclear whether or not similar results can be achieved elsewhere (Wagenaar et al., 2013; Myintzaw et al., 2020).

Campylobacter infections are more likely to occur when raw poultry is handled improperly in a home kitchen (Kingsbury et al., 2023). According to Bull et al. (2006), C. jejuni may be present in 98% of commercially available chicken flesh in the USA and Europe. Table 2 presents information about the prevalence of Campylobacter spp. in raw chicken in various countries.Table 2 Campylobacter species prevalence in retail raw poultry meat in various countries.

Table 2Region	Higher count spp.	Detection %	References	
Spain	Campylobacter spp.	50	EFSA (European Food Safety Authority) and ECDC (European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control), 2016	
UK	Campylobacter spp.	68.3	EFSA (European Food Safety Authority) and ECDC (European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control), 2016	
Poland	Campylobacter jejuni > Campylobacter coli	50	Korsak et al., 2015	
Hungary	Campylobacter spp.	31.6	EFSA (European Food Safety Authority) and ECDC (European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control), 2016	
Japan	Campylobacter jejuni > Campylobacter coli	14–64	Furukawa et al., 2017	
Estonia	Campylobacter jejuni > Campylobacter coli	20.8	Mäesaar et al., 2014	
Italy	Campylobacter jejuni > Campylobacter coli Campylobacter spp.	34–24	Mezher et al., 2016	
France	Campylobacter jejuni > Campylobacter coli	76	Thépault et al., 2018	
Austria	Campylobacter spp.	56.7	EFSA (European Food Safety Authority) and ECDC (European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control), 2016	
Canada	Campylobacter	29–42	Cook et al., 2012	
South Korea	Campylobacter jejuni > Campylobacter coli	50–100	Wei et al., 2016	
China	Campylobacter jejuni < Campylobacter coli	31.3–51	Ma et al., 2014	
Slovenia	Campylobacter spp.	66.7	EFSA (European Food Safety Authority) and ECDC (European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control), 2016	
Ireland	Campylobacter	0.50	Myintzaw et al., 2023	

Antimicrobial Resistance in Campylobacter Spp

Antibiotics are a type of antibacterial that either prevent the proliferation of bacteria or slow its progression (Lynch et al., 2020; Abd El-Hack et al., 2022b). Since the discovery of penicillin by Alexander Fleming in 1928 (Tan and Tatsumura, 2015; Kovács et al., 2019), antibiotics have greatly improved the prevention and treatment of infectious diseases in both human and veterinary medicine due to their ability to kill off harmful bacteria (Qin et al., 2023). Antibiotics were first used in animal production in the 1940s when they were introduced as growth boosters (Casagrande Proietti et al., 2018; Dai et al., 2020).

In response to the widespread use of antibiotics in hospitals and farms, Campylobacter has evolved multiple methods of resistance. Since then, the abuse of antibiotics in agriculture has led to an increase of antimicrobial-resistant foodborne bacteria, such as Campylobacter, which poses a severe threat to the efficacy of antibiotic therapies and raises serious public health issues (Van Boeckel et al., 2015; Khan et al., 2018; García-Sánchez et al., 2019). Antibiotics that are medically important to people were banned as growth promoters in food animal production in the USA in 2017. This was done in response to growing public health concerns about the spread of antibiotic-resistant foodborne bacteria to humans along the food chain (WHO, 2015, 2020; USDA, 2017).

In both underdeveloped and developed nations, Campylobacter isolates resistant to many antibiotics have been found (Bolinger and Kathariou, 2017; Myintzaw et al., 2023). Naturally occurring Campylobacter strains have developed resistance to many medications, including vancomycin, trimethoprim, rifampin, and bacitracin (Myintzaw et al., 2023). However, the precise resistance mechanisms remain unclear (Sproston et al., 2018; Santos-Ferreira et al., 2022). In addition, Campylobacter is resistant to fluoroquinolone, macrolides, and tetracycline (Tang et al., 2017; Vizzini et al., 2021). Less than 10% of Campylobacter isolates in the USA and other industrialized nations are resistant to macrolides (Engberg et al., 2001; Cha et al., 2016). However, this trend was more pronounced in developing countries (Okeke et al., 2005; Buiatte et al., 2023). Most macrolide-resistant C. coli strains have been found in pigs because tylosin is commonly used as a growth stimulant in the pig industry (Natsos et al., 2019). Campylobacter isolated from other animals, appears to have poor macrolide resistance (Tedersoo et al., 2022).

Expected low levels of macrolide resistance in Campylobacter suggest that longer courses of treatment are necessary (Caldwell et al., 2008; García-Sánchez et al., 2020). Another factor is that the resistance phenotype is less permanent because to the large fitness cost associated with macrolide resistance, so Campylobacter might quickly lose the phenotypic in the absence of selection pressure (Luangtongkum et al., 2009; Vandeputte et al., 2020). Unlike with macrolides, there has been a consistent worldwide increase in fluoroquinolone resistance among Campylobacter isolates (Sproston et al., 2018). In the 1980s, fluoroquinolone was initially introduced to the chicken industry as a means of preventing and treating respiratory illnesses (Kovács et al., 2016).

Resistance to fluoroquinolones in Campylobacter can be challenging to treat because of the antibiotic's broad range activity and widespread usage in the treatment of infectious diseases, including campylobacteriosis (Andersson and MacGowan, 2003). Since then, however, there has been an alarming increase in cases of human and avian fluoroquinolone-resistant Campylobacter (Engberg et al., 2001). Nachamkin et al. (2002) conducted a study and found that the percentage of C. jejuni isolates showing resistance to fluoroquinolones has increased dramatically from 5% in 1992 to 40.5% in 2002. Between 2008 and 2014, studies in China found that among Campylobacter isolates from chicken, nearly 100% were resistant to fluoroquinolones (Wang et al., 2016).

Multiple studies have linked campylobacteriosis to fluoroquinolones-resistant Campylobacter found in contaminated poultry products as the likely source of the bacteria (Nothaft et al., 2021). Patients identified with fluoroquinolone-resistant campylobacteriosis were less likely to have taken fluoroquinolones prior to diagnosis than those diagnosed with fluoroquinolone-susceptible campylobacteriosis, according to Kassenborg et al. (2004). In addition, those who developed fluoroquinolone-resistant campylobacteriosis were ten times more likely to eat poultry items in the week prior to getting sick than the healthy controls were. Nothaft et al. (2021) hypothesized that the infection originated from ingesting fluoroquinolone-resistant Campylobacter from contaminated bird items.

Results from in vitro and in vivo studies by Luo et al. (2003) and Han et al. (2012) suggested that resistance to fluoroquinolones improves the fitness of Campylobacter. In 2005, the USA Food and Drug Administration (FDA) banned the use of fluoroquinolones in the USA chicken sector due to this problem (Han et al., 2012). However, in spite of these efforts, no less fluoroquinolone-resistant Campylobacter has been found in either poultry or humans in the USA. In the absence of such selective forces, it was hypothesized that fluoroquinolone-resistant Campylobacter would persist in broilers (Han et al., 2012).

Several in vivo and in vitro experiments demonstrated that less than 24 h is required to detect fluoroquinolones-resistant C. jejuni following drug uptake, demonstrating the rapidity with which Campylobacter acquires resistance to these antibiotics (Gencay et al., 2018). Point mutation accumulation in the gyrA and parC genes is a necessary and sufficient condition for the development of fluoroquinolones resistance in other enteric bacteria, such as Salmonella and E. coli (Morgan-Linnell et al., 2009).

Campylobacter, on the other hand, only needs a single point mutation in gyrA to become resistant to fluoroquinolones. The most commonly documented point mutation in Campylobacter is a change from threonine to isoleucine at position 86 in the gyrA (Yan et al., 2006). This gyrA mutation alters DNA architecture during transcription, replication, and recombination by decreasing negative supercoiling (Han et al., 2012).

DNA supercoiling variations affect a wide range of promoter functions and transcriptome expressions, both in vitro and in vivo (Nothaft et al., 2021). Variable gene expressions were also observed in C. jejuni, according to another in vitro investigation that evaluated the transcriptome expressions of fluoroquinolone-resistant and -susceptible Campylobacter (Han, 2009). Results showed that negative supercoiling and regulatory mechanisms in C. jejuni were attenuated in the absence of fluoroquinolones, suggesting that resistance to these antibiotics improves iron uptake (Han, 2009). Although fluoroquinolone-resistant Campylobacter has emerged and persisted in USA broiler production, our understanding of the ecological drivers of fluoroquinolones resistance dynamics within the Campylobacter population and the hazard agents associated with this phenomenon is limited (Han, 2009).

Using commercial antimicrobials to reduce Campylobacter contamination in poultry processing

Reductions in Campylobacter spp. have been attributed to the use of commercially available antimicrobial technologies throughout the processing of broiler chickens (McKenna et al., 2020; Gichure et al., 2022). Kemp et al. (2001) reduced microbial levels on contaminated chicken carcasses utilizing an online acidified sodium chlorite spray system and an inside-outside broiler chickens carcass washer. Several agents, such as acidified sodium hypochlorite, cetylpyridinium chloride, ozone, chlorine dioxide, chlorine, peroxy acids, or trisodium phosphate, have been used to decrease the number of Campylobacter spp., in carcasses (Oyarzabal, 2005). Figure 7 shows the results of utilizing commercial antimicrobials to reduce Campylobacter contamination in broilers throughout processing.Figure 7 Using commercial antimicrobials such acidified sodium chloride, chlorine, chlorine dioxide, ozone, peroxy-acids, or trisodium phosphate to reduce Campylobacter contamination during broiler production.

Figure 7

Campylobacter load in raw chicken carcasses was observed to be reduced by Arritt et al. (2002). Commercial use of an effective antibacterial chemical spray consisting of 10% trisodium phosphate, 0.1% acidified sodium hypochlorite, 0.1 and 0.5% cetylpyridinium chloride, or 1% tween 80 could reduce the amount of rinse water necessary for cleaning carcasses (Arritt et al., 2002). Adding chlorine to cold water during chicken processing has been investigated and shown to be effective by Yang et al. (2001). They demonstrated that it did not drastically lower the number of S. typhimurium and Campylobacter on the chicken integument (Yang et al., 2001).

Chilling water with chlorine dioxide has been shown to reduce microbiological contamination in commercial broiler processing plants by Doyle and Waldroup (1996). The number of Campylobacter was reduced by 1.5 logs in 1 d and 1.2 logs in 6 d storage on trisodium phosphate-treated carcasses, according to Slavik et al. (1994). Iwata et al. (2023) reported that tryptanthrin reduced the number of C. jejuni bacteria in the intestines of chickens.

Control of Campylobacter Infection in Poultry

Figure 8 shows that the risk of Campylobacter in broiler chickens exists from the time they are raised on farms through the time they are processed in poultry plants, stored, and finally cooked. Figure 9 provides a concise overview of the methods used to prevent the spread of Campylobacter illness in broiler chickens.Figure 8 Campylobacter exposure risk at various stages of broiler chicken rearing, such as the farm (flock prevalence, within flock prevalence, external contamination), the processing plant (scald, evisceration, chill), storage (refrigeration, freezing), and preparation (cross contamination, cooking).

Figure 8

Figure 9 Control of Campylobacter infection in broiler chickens includes increasing immunity in birds through vaccination, improving bird health through balanced feed with additives (antimicrobial or natural antibiotic alternatives), and implementing biosecurity measures at various levels of rearing, transportation, processing, and handling.

Figure 9

The most effective on-farm intervention to prevent the introduction of Campylobacter into broilers is an increase in biosecurity and general hygiene standards (D'angelantonio et al., 2021; Dogan et al., 2022). To prevent the spread of Campylobacter in broilers, even the most stringent on-farm biosecurity measures have proven ineffective (Sibanda et al., 2018; Poudel et al., 2022).

However, these precautions only appear to work in the Scandinavian countries, where the prevalence of Campylobacter in broilers is already low, and severe weather patterns may prevent the survival of certain insect and rodent populations that may be harboring Campylobacter (Lianou et al., 2017; Zhang et al., 2018). Feed and water acidification are two more examples of on-farm interventions that have proven ineffective (Hermans et al., 2011; El Haddad et al., 2019). To a lesser extent, it appears that acidifying litter treatments, which are meant to make the litter environment less hospitable to Campylobacter and other foodborne pathogens such as Salmonella, have only a modest effect on Campylobacter levels in broilers (Chinivasagam et al., 2020; Hwang and Singer, 2020). Probiotics have been shown to drastically lower Campylobacter count, according to studies by Arsi et al. (2015) and Taha-Abdelaziz et al. (2019). Bacillus subtilis PS-216 showed substantial anti-Campylobacter activities, as determined by Šimunovi´c et al. (2022), although the medium growth temperature and presence of oxygen are both crucial for B. subtilis.

The effectiveness of several dietary supplements against Campylobacter in broilers was also assessed by Guyard-Nicodème et al. (2016) throughout the whole of the rearing process. Khan et al. (2020) showed that prebiotics significantly decreased Campylobacter colonization in the guts of layering organisms and Erega et al. (2021) demonstrated that probiotics could be used to control Campylobacter infection. A similar antibacterial effect was obtained for carrots essential oil against Campylobacter infection by Luc et al. (2020). Glycyrrhiza glabra (Liquorice) extract was shown to decrease C. jejuni colonization in the intestines of broiler chickens in a separate investigation conducted by Ibrahim et al. (2020). According to Peh et al. (2020), organic acids have strong antibacterial action and may be able to lower the number of Campylobacter spp. When tested against C. jejuni in sterile distilled water, sodium caprate, thymol, carvacrol, and potassium sorbate were all found to diminish C. jejuni count when used at various concentrations and exposure times by Greene et al. (2022). Bacteriophages have been studied for their potential to reduce the prevalence of Campylobacter in broiler chickens by Richards et al. (2019), Chinivasagam et al. (2020), Ushanov et al. (2020), and Nafarrate et al. (2021).

There are currently no on-farm therapies proven to be effective and cost-efficient in reducing Campylobacter occurrence and levels in broilers (Thomas et al., 2020; Beterams et al., 2023). Bacteriocins, immunization, and probiotics were three more innovative methods used to reduce Campylobacter colonization on farms and in slaughterhouses (Nishiyama et al., 2014; Meunier et al., 2017; Helmy et al., 2022). The most encouraging outcomes have been shown with the immunization of broiler chicks against Campylobacter (Helmy et al., 2022). Using a Campylobacter vaccine created from multiplication proteins exposed on the surface of C. jejuni, Neal-McKinney et al. (2014) demonstrated a 2 log reduction in the degree of C. jejuni colonization in 20 d old chickens following intramuscular injection (Neal-McKinney et al., 2014). Two recent studies have employed an effective vaccine against Campylobacter infection in broilers (Meunier et al., 2017; Nothaft et al., 2017).

To transport Campylobacter immunogenic surface proteins, Wyszyńska et al. (2004) used attenuated Salmonella as a vector. Broiler chicks as young as 4 wk old were vaccinated orally, and the results demonstrated a significant decrease in the prevalence and levels of C. jejuni multiplication compared to control groups (Wyszyńska et al., 2004; Poudel et al., 2023). However, these novel interventions are still in the early stages of development, so more study is needed to optimize the best delivery system and test efficacy in real-world settings (Djennad et al., 2017; Mota-Gutierrez et al., 2022). Producers will have to rely on biosecurity improvements to poultry farms until these interventions are ready for widespread application (Mota-Gutierrez et al., 2022).

Table 3 briefly explains the advantages and disadvantages of various methods to reduce Campylobacter dissemination. Figure 10, Figure 11 demonstrated that implementing the regulations of HACCP, inspecting chicken meat, enforcing these regulations, forming stakeholder groups, and providing food handlers with training can lower the risk of campylobacteriosis.Table 3 The advantages and disadvantages of various Campylobacter species dissemination control strategies.

Table 3Feed and water treatments	Study location	Advantages	Disadvantages	References	
Organic and fatty acids, essential oils, plant extracts	Farm	(1) Enhances the gut microbiota's beneficial bacteria

(2) Limits the gut pathogens

(3) Decreases the pathogens population with increasing the concentration

(4) Used as a green antibacterial agent

	(1) Variable effects on the reduction of Campylobacter colonization in various studies

(2) The gut conditions may impede the effectiveness of the active compounds

(3) Variations in effects were observed in the field

(4) Few indications of reproducibility

	Dedieu et al., 2020	
Probiotics	Farm	(1) Enhances the gut microbiota's beneficial bacteria

(2) Utilized as a substitute for antibiotics to enhance feed conversion ratio

(3) When combined with vaccines, enhance the vaccine's effectiveness in preventing Campylobacter colonization

(4) Meets consumer's acceptance

	Variability in their effectiveness across studies. More on-farm research is required to improve this method	Mañes-Lázaro et al., 2017	
Bacteriocin	Farm	(1) A group of competitive bacteria in the intestine, representing the inner defend against pathogens

(2) Improves livestock growth by inhibiting or controlling pathogens and improving animal health

	(1) Commercial use necessitates large-scale, cheap manufacture of bacteriocins on-farm. This issue is still unsettled.

(2) The in vivo effectiveness of bacteriocins must be validated and duplicated in natural chicken production circumstances and with a broader diversity of field strains

	Dai et al., 2020	
Bacteriophage	Farm	(1) Effectively reducing colonization (>3 log)

(2) Targeted antibacterial biocontrol approach

(3) Safely to human and animals

	(1) Due to the development of resistance or other circumstances, Campylobacter may be able to quickly adapt to phage therapy, although fitness costs prevented this from delaying the bacterium's elimination

(2) Inconsistent findings across studies

(3) Phage mixtures must be effective against all Campylobacter species

	Richards et al., 2019; Chinivasagam et al., 2020	
Vaccine	Farm	(1) Potential vaccines acute results than water or additives application

(2) Reduces Campylobacter load up to 10 log CFU

	(1) Inconsistent findings across studies

(2) Despite numerous efforts, there is no operative vaccine on the market

	Ramakrishnan et al., 2019	
Slaw and fast freezing	Slaughterhouse	(1) Reduces Campylobacter in the carcasses up to 2.51 log carcasses

(2) Cost-effective and available.

(3) Less drip loss during thawing and less water holding capacity loss of compared to slow freezing

	(1) Higher drip loss during thawing and a decrease in water holding capacity of frozen meat in contrast to rapid freezing

(2) Visible modification may reduce the marketability of this technique

	Haughton et al., 2012; Harrison et al., 2013	
Steam-ultrasound	Slaughterhouse	Reducing Campylobacter in the carcasses >2.51 log	Changes in chicken skins but it is acceptable	Musavian et al., 2014	

Figure 10 Avian campylobacteriosis poses a risk to humans at various stages of rearing and processing, and it can be controlled by implementing regulations, a hazard analysis and critical control points programs (HACCP), initiating and enforcing it, forming a stakeholder group, and providing food handler training.

Figure 10

Figure 11 Lowering the risk of avian campylobacteriosis at various stages of rearing and processing by implementing farm-level regulations, hazard analysis and critical control points (HACCP) systems during chicken processing, retail, market, and restaurant inspections and enforcements, stakeholder groups, food handler training, and proper cooking.

Figure 11

The Importance of Natural Antibiotics in the Prevention and Treatment of Campylobacteriosis

The growing concern surrounding antibiotic resistance in Campylobacter has led to an increase in the number of research efforts being put toward the creation of new and alternative control methods for campylobacteriosis (Dai et al., 2020). Numerous studies have been carried out up to this point to reduce the amount of Campylobacter colonization in animals that are used in the production of food, with the end goal of improving public health by eliminating potential sources of infection (Dai et al., 2020). Both prebiotics and probiotics have been utilized extensively in an effort to enhance bird performance and reduce the proliferation of pathogens (Khan et al., 2020; Abd El-Hack et al., 2021b; Erega et al., 2021).

In a mouse model, Morrow et al. (2005) showed that human milk oligosaccharides (HMOs) inhibit the proliferation of C. jejuni. When mannan-oligosaccharide was introduced as a feed supplement at a concentration of 0.2%, Baurhoo et al. (2009) observed that the level of Campylobacter detected in chicken cecal contents and litter samples dropped by a significant amount. Wyszyńska and Godlewska (2021) demonstrated the role of lactic acid bacteria in minimizing the incidence of Campylobacter infection in hens. Butyrate was the most effective short chain fatty acids against C. jejuni in culture media, according to experimental research conducted by Van Deun et al. (2008). However, adding butyrate to feed for broiler chicken had no effect on C. jejuni colonization. In postharvest chicken, Wagle et al. (2021) discovered that the phytochemicals turmeric, curcumin, allyl sulfide, garlic oil, and ginger oil could reduce the number of C. jejuni and pinpoint the underlying mechanisms of action.

Despite the promising results seen with some of these antibiotic natural alternatives, reliable alternatives with known doses, well-known mechanisms of action, and known side effects have not yet been created; therefore, more research is needed to clear out these points.

CONCLUSIONS

The primary cause of human campylobacteriosis worldwide is chicken products. Along with the rise in Campylobacter-related illnesses, the prevalence of antibiotic-resistant Campylobacter spp. has also risen. Therefore, it is crucial to develop innovative natural antimicrobial treatments together with appropriate biosecurity and hygiene practices at the farm level to prevent Campylobacter colonization in commercial avian farms, which is the main cause of human sickness. Some feed additives and immunizations are necessary in order to affect the virulence of Campylobacter and the survival variables that are associated with microbial pathogenesis. Campylobacteriosis risks will be reduced by the implementation of HACCP regulations, chicken meat inspection, enforcement, stakeholder group, and food handler training. It is possible that the combination of these preventative measures will lead to a successful intervention that will stop the spread of Campylobacter infections into the food chain and reduce the associated risks to human health. However, additional research is required before these treatments may be considered completely effective.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This publication was made possible by grant number NC.X-267-5-12-170-1 from the National Institute of Food and Agriculture (NIFA) and the Department of Family and Consumer Sciences and the Agriculture Research Station at North Carolina Agriculture and Technical State University (Greensboro, NC, USA 27411). This work was also supported, in part, by 1890 Capacity Building Program grant no. (2020-38821-31113/project accession no. 021765). Also, the authors extend their appreciation to the Deanship of Scientific Research at King Khalid University for funding this work through Small Group Research Project under grant number 44/487, and the authors acknowledge the Research Center for Advance Materials (RCAMS) at King Khalid University, Saudi Arabia for their valuable technical support. This review was also funded by the Abu Dhabi Award for Research Excellence—10.13039/501100015520 Department of Education and Knowledge (Grant #: 21S105) to K. A. El-Tarabily.

Author contributions: All authors were equal contributors in writing this review article. All of them read and approved the final manuscript.

DISCLOSURES

All authors declare no conflicts of interest.


REFERENCES

Abd El-Hack M.E. El-Saadony M.T. Shehata A.M. Arif M. Paswan V.K. Batiha G.E.-S. Khafaga A.F. Elbestawy A.R. Approaches to prevent and control Campylobacter spp. colonization in broiler chickens: a review Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res. Int. 28 2021 4989 5004 33242194 10.1007/s11356-020-11747-3
Abd El-Hack M.E. El-Saadony M.T. Shafi M.E. Alshahrani O.A. Saghir S.A. Al-Wajeeh A.S. Abdel-Moneim A.M.E. Prebiotics can restrict Salmonella populations in poultry: a review Anim. Biotechnol. 7 2021 1668 1677 10.1080/10495398.2021.1883637 33607922
Abd El-Hack M.E. El-Saadony M.T. Salem H.M. El-Tahan A.M. Soliman M.M. Youssef G.B.A. Youssef G.B. Taha A.E. Soliman S.M. Ahmed A.E. El-kott A.F. AlSyaad K.M. Swelum A.A. Alternatives to antibiotics for organic poultry production: types, modes of action and impacts on bird's health and production Poult. Sci. 101 2022 101696 10.1016/j.psj.2022.101696 PMC8844281 35150942
Abd El-Hack M.E. El-Saadony M.T. Elbestawy A.R. El-Shall N.A. Saad A.M. Salem H.M. El-Tahan A.M. Khafaga A.F. Taha A.E. AbuQamar S.F. El-Tarabily K.A. Necrotic enteritis in broiler chickens: disease characteristics and prevention using organic antibiotic alternatives—a comprehensive review Poult. Sci. 101 2022 101590 10.1016/j.psj.2021.101590 PMC8715378 34953377
Achen M. Morishita T.Y. Ley E.C. Shedding and colonization of Campylobacter jejuni in broilers from day-of-hatch to slaughter age Avian Dis. 42 1998 732 737 9876841
Agunos A. Waddell L. Léger D. Taboada E. A systematic review characterizing on-farm sources of Campylobacter spp. for broiler chickens PLoS One 9 2014 e104905 10.1371/journal.pone.0104905 PMC4149356 25171228
Ahmed J. Arfat Y.A. Bher A. Mulla M. Jacob H. Auras R. Active chicken meat packaging based on polylactide films and bimetallic Ag-Cu nanoparticles and essential oil J. Food Sci. 83 2018 1299 1310 29660773 10.1111/1750-3841.14121
Allen K.J. Griffiths M.W. Use of luminescent Campylobacter jejuni ATCC 33291 to assess eggshell colonization and penetration in fresh and retail eggs J. Food Prot. 64 2001 2058 2062 11770638 10.4315/0362-028x-64.12.2058
Allos B.M. Campylobacter jejuni infections: update on emerging issues and trends Clin. Infect. Dis. 32 2001 1201 1206 11283810 10.1086/319760
Altekruse S.F. Stern N.J. Fields P.I. Swerdlow D.L. Campylobacter jejuni an emerging foodborne pathogen Emerg. Infect. Dis. 5 1999 28 35 10081669 10.3201/eid0501.990104 PMC2627687
Andersson M.I. MacGowan A.P. Development of the quinolones J. Antimicrob. Chemother. 51 Suppl. 1 2003 1 11 10.1093/jac/dkg212 12702698
Arritt F.M. Eifert J.D. Pierson M.D. Sumner S.S. Efficacy of antimicrobials against Campylobacter jejuni on chicken breast skin J. Appl. Poult. Res. 11 2002 358 366
Arsenault J. Letellier A. Quessy S. Normand V. Boulianne M. Prevalence and risk factors for Salmonella spp. and Campylobacter spp. caecal colonization in broiler chicken and turkey flocks slaughtered in Quebec, Canada Prev. Vet. Med. 81 2007 250 264 17532069 10.1016/j.prevetmed.2007.04.016
Arsi K. Donoghue A.M. Woo-Ming A. Blore P.J. Donoghue D.J. Intracloacal inoculation, an effective screening method for determining the efficacy of probiotic bacterial isolates against Campylobacter colonization in broiler chickens J. Food Prot. 78 2015 209 2013 25581198 10.4315/0362-028X.JFP-14-326
Asare P.T. Zurfluh K. Greppi A. Lynch D. Schwab C. Stephan R. Lacroix C. Reuterin demonstrates potent antimicrobial activity against a broad panel of human and poultry meat Campylobacter spp. isolates Microorganisms 8 2020 78 31935889 10.3390/microorganisms8010078 PMC7022665
Bahrndorff S. Rangstrup-Christensen L. Nordentoft S. Hald B. Foodborne disease prevention and broiler chickens with reduced Campylobacter infection Emerg. Infect. Dis. 19 2013 425 430 23628089 10.3201/eid1903.111593 PMC3647641
Bailey M.A. Taylor R.M. Brar J.S. Corkran S.C. Velasquez C. Rama E.N. Oliver H.F. Singh M. Prevalence and antimicrobial resistance of Campylobacter from antibiotic-free broilers during organic and conventional processing Poult. Sci. 98 2019 1447 1454 30325456 10.3382/ps/pey486
Ballou A.L. Ali R.A. Mendoza M.A. Ellis J.C. Hassan H.M. Croom W.J. Koci M.D. Development of the chick microbiome: how early exposure influences future microbial diversity Front. Vet. Sci. 3 2016 2 26835461 10.3389/fvets.2016.00002 PMC4718982
Balta I. Linton M. Pinkerton L. Kelly C. Stef L. Pet I. Stef D. Cristete A. Gundogdu O. Corcionivoschi N. The effect of natural antimicrobials against Campylobacter spp. and its similarities to Salmonella spp., Listeria spp., Escherichia coli, Vibrio spp., Clostridium spp. and Staphylococcus spp Food Control 121 2021 107745
Barbut S. Pages 541 in Poultry Products Processing: An Industry Guide 2016 CRC Press Boca Raton, FL
Barker C.R. Painset A. Swift C. Jenkins C. Godbole G. Maiden M.C.J. Dallman T.J. Microevolution of Campylobacter jejuni during long-term infection in an immunocompromised host Sci. Rep. 10 2020 10109 32572150 10.1038/s41598-020-66771-7 PMC7308304
Bashor M.P. Curtis P.A. Keener K.M. Sheldon B.W. Kathariou S. Osborne J.A. Effects of carcass washers on Campylobacter contamination in large broiler processing plants Poult. Sci. 83 2004 1232 1239 15285518 10.1093/ps/83.7.1232
Battersby T. Whyte P. Bolton D.J. The pattern of Campylobacter contamination on broiler farms; external and internal sources J. Appl. Microbiol. 120 2016 1108 1118 26788933 10.1111/jam.13066
Baurhoo B. Ferket P.R. Zhao X. Effects of diets containing different concentrations of mannanoligosaccharide or antibiotics on growth performance, intestinal development, cecal and litter microbial populations, and carcass parameters of broilers Poult. Sci. 88 2009 2262 2272 19834074 10.3382/ps.2008-00562
Beery J.T. Hugdahl M.B. Doyle M.P. Colonization of gastrointestinal tracts of chicks by Campylobacter jejuni Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 54 1988 2365 2370 3060015 10.1128/aem.54.10.2365-2370.1988 PMC204261
Béjaoui A. Gharbi M. Bitri S. Nasraoui D. Ben Aziza W. Ghedira K. Rfaik M. Marzougui L. Ghram A. Maaroufi A. Virulence profiling, multidrug resistance and molecular mechanisms of Campylobacter strains from chicken carcasses in Tunisia Antibiotics 11 2022 830 35884085 10.3390/antibiotics11070830 PMC9312241
Berrang M.E. Bailey J.S. Altekruse S.F. Patel B. Shaw Jr W.K. Meinersmann R.J. Fedorka-Cray P.J. Prevalence and numbers of Campylobacter on broiler carcasses collected at rehang and post chill in 20 U.S. processing plants J. Food Prot. 70 2007 1556 1560 17685325 10.4315/0362-028x-70.7.1556
Berrang M.E. Buhr R.J. Cason J.A. Dickens J.A. Broiler carcass contamination with Campylobacter from feces during defeathering J. Food Prot. 64 2001 2063 2066 11770639 10.4315/0362-028x-64.12.2063
Berrang M.E. Dickens J.A. Presence and level of Campylobacter spp. on broiler carcasses throughout the processing plant J. Appl. Poult. Res. 9 2000 43 47
Berrang M.E. Meinersmann R.J. Smith D.P. Zhuang H. The effect of chilling in cold air or ice water on the microbiological quality of broiler carcasses and the population of Campylobacter Poult. Sci. 87 2008 992 998 18420993 10.3382/ps.2007-00406
Berrang M.E. Smith D.P. Meinersmann R.J. Variations on standard broiler processing in an effort to reduce Campylobacter numbers on post pick carcasses J. Appl. Poult. Res. 20 2011 197 202
Bertram R. Kehrenberg C. Seinige D. Krischek C. Peracetic acid reduces Campylobacter spp. numbers and total viable counts on broiler breast muscle and drumstick skins during modified atmosphere package storage Poult. Sci. 98 2019 5064 5073 31073589 10.3382/ps/pez266
Beterams A. Tolksdorf T. Martin A. Stingl K. Bandick N. Reich F. Change of Campylobacter, Escherichia coli and Salmonella counts in packaged broiler breast meat stored under modified atmosphere and vacuum conditions at 4 and 10°C based on cultural and molecular biological quantification Food Control 145 2023 109337
Bezek K. Kurinčič M. Knauder E. Klančnik A. Raspor P. Bucar F. Možina S.S. Attenuation of adhesion, biofilm formation and quorum sensing of Campylobacter jejuni by Euodia ruticarpa Phyther. Res. 30 2016 1527 1532 10.1002/ptr.5658 27230628
Biswas C. Leboveic A. Burke K. Biswas D. Post-harvest approaches to improve poultry meat safety Venkitanarayanan K. Thakur S. Ricke S.C. Pages 123–138 in Food Safety in Poultry Meat Production, Food Microbiology and Food Safety 2019 Springer Cham; Switzerland
Bolinger H. Kathariou S. The current state of macrolide resistance in Campylobacter spp.: trends and impacts of resistance mechanisms Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 83 2017 e00416 e00417 28411226 10.1128/AEM.00416-17 PMC5452823
Bolton F.J. Wareing D.R. Sails A.D. Comparison of a novel microaerobic system with three other gas-generating systems for the recovery of Campylobacter species from human faecal samples Eur. J. Clin. Microbiol. Infect. Dis. 16 1997 839 842 9447907 10.1007/BF01700415
Borrmann E. Berndt A. Hanel I. Kohler H. Campylobacter-induced interleukin-8 responses in human intestinal epithelial cells and primary intestinal chick cells Vet. Microbiol. 124 2007 115 124 17540517 10.1016/j.vetmic.2007.04.041
Buhr R.J. Walker J.M. Bourassa D.V. Caudill A.B. Kiepper B.H. Zhuang H. Impact of broiler processing scalding and chilling profiles on carcass and breast meat yield Poult. Sci. 93 2014 1534 1541 24879703 10.3382/ps.2013-03535
Buiatte A.B.G. de Melo R.T. Peres P.A.B.M. Bastos C.M. Grazziotin A.L. Rodriguez P.M.A. Barreto F. Rossi D.A. Virulence, antimicrobial resistance, and dissemination of Campylobacter coli isolated from chicken carcasses in Brazil Food Control 147 2023 109613
Bull S.A. Allen V.M. Domingue G. Jørgensen F. Frost J.A. Ure R. Whyte R. Tinker D. Corry J.E. Gillard-King J. Humphrey T.J. Sources of Campylobacter spp. colonizing housed broiler flocks during rearing Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 72 2006 645 652 16391102 10.1128/AEM.72.1.645-652.2006 PMC1352183
Byrne C.M. Clyne M. Bourke B. Campylobacter jejuni adhere to and invade chicken intestinal epithelial cells in vitro Microbiology 153 2007 561 569 17259628 10.1099/mic.0.2006/000711-0
Caldwell D.B. Wang Y. Lin J. Development, stability, and molecular mechanisms of macrolide resistance in Campylobacter jejuni Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 52 2008 3947 3954 18779354 10.1128/AAC.00450-08 PMC2573100
Callicott K.A. Friethriksdottir V. Reiersen J. Lowman R. Bisaillon J.R. Gunnarsson E. Berndtson E. Hiett K.L. Needleman D.S. Stern N.J. Lack of evidence for vertical transmission of Campylobacter spp. in chickens Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 72 2006 5794 5798 16957196 10.1128/AEM.02991-05 PMC1563688
Campagnolo E.R. Philipp L.M. Long J.M. Hanshaw N.L. Pet-associated campylobacteriosis: a persisting public health concern Zoonoses Public Health 65 2018 304 311 28834267 10.1111/zph.12389
Cardinale E. Tall F. Gueye E.F. Cisse M. Salvat G. Risk factors for Campylobacter spp. infection in Senegalese broiler-chicken flocks Prev. Vet. Med. 64 2004 15 25 15219966 10.1016/j.prevetmed.2004.03.006
Casagrande Proietti P. Pergola S. Bellucci S. Menchetti L. Miraglia D. Franciosini M.P. Occurrence and antimicrobial susceptibility of Campylobacter spp. on fresh and refrigerated chicken meat products in Central Italy Poult. Sci. 97 2018 2895 2901 29762774 10.3382/ps/pey147
Castillo S. Heredia N. Arechiga-Carvajal E. García S. Citrus extracts as inhibitors of quorum sensing, biofilm formation and motility of Campylobacter jejuni Food Biotechnol. 28 2014 106 122
CDC Foodborne Diseases Active Surveillance Network (FoodNet): FoodNet 2015 Surveillance Report (Final Data) 2017 Department of Health and Human Services, CDC Atlanta, GA
CDC. 2019. Questions and Answers: Campylobacter (Campylobacteriosis). Accessed Jan. 2023. https://www.cdc.gov/campylobacter/faq.html.
Cha W. Mosci R. Wengert S.L. Singh P. Newton D.W. Salimnia H. Lephart P. Khalife W. Mansfield L.S. Rudrik J.T. Manning S.D. Antimicrobial susceptibility profiles of human Campylobacter jejuni isolates and association with phylogenetic lineages Front. Microbiol. 7 2016 589 27199922 10.3389/fmicb.2016.00589 PMC4845714
Chantarapanont W. Berrang M.E. Frank J.F. Direct microscopic observation of viability of Campylobacter jejuni on chicken skin treated with selected chemical sanitizing agent J. Food Prot. 67 2004 1146 1152 15222541 10.4315/0362-028x-67.6.1146
Chinivasagam H.N. Estella W. Maddock L. Mayer D.G. Weyand C. Connerton P.L. Connerton I.F. Bacteriophages to control Campylobacter in commercially farmed broiler chickens, in Australia Front. Microbiol. 11 2020 632 32395115 10.3389/fmicb.2020.00632 PMC7197261
Chintoan-Uta C. Wisedchanwet T. Glendinning L. Bremner A. Psifidi A. Vervelde L. Watson K. Watson M. Stevens M.P. Role of cecal microbiota in the differential resistance of inbred chicken lines to colonization by Campylobacter jejuni Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 86 2020 e02607 e02619 31980428 10.1128/AEM.02607-19 PMC7082564
Chowdhury S. Sandberg M. Themudo G.E. Ersboll A.K. Risk factors for Campylobacter infection in Danish broiler chickens Poult. Sci. 91 2012 2701 2709 22991560 10.3382/ps.2012-02412
Clavijo V. Florez M.J.V. The gastrointestinal microbiome and its association with the control of pathogens in broiler chicken production: a review Poult. Sci. 97 2018 1006 1021 29253263 10.3382/ps/pex359 PMC5850219
Cook A. Odumeru J. Lee S. Pollari F. Campylobacter, Salmonella, Listeria monocytogenes, verotoxigenic Escherichia coli, and Escherichia coli prevalence, enumeration, and subtypes on retail chicken breasts with and without skin J. Food Prot. 75 2012 34 40 22221353 10.4315/0362-028X.JFP-11-206
Coward C. van Diemen P.M. Conlan A.J.K. Gog J.R. Stevens M.P. Jones M.A. Maskell D.J. Competing isogenic Campylobacter strains exhibit variable population structures in vivo Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 74 2008 3857 3867 18424530 10.1128/AEM.02835-07 PMC2446568
Cox N.A. Bailey J.S. Richardson L.J. Buhr R.J. Cosby D.E. Wilson J.L. Hiett K.L. Siragusa G.R. Bourassa D.V. Presence of naturally occurring Campylobacter and Salmonella in the mature and immature ovarian follicles of late-life broiler breeder hens Avian Dis. 49 2005 285 287 16094836 10.1637/7324-011005
Cox N.A. Richardson L.J. Maurer J.J. Berrang M.E. Fedorka-Cray P.J. Buhr R.J. Byrd J.A. Lee M.D. Hofacre C.L. O'Kane P.M. Lammerding A.M. Clark A.G. Thayer S.G. Doyle M.P. Evidence for horizontal and vertical transmission in Campylobacter passage from hen to her progeny J. Food Prot. 75 2012 1896 1902 23043845 10.4315/0362-028.JFP-11-322
Cox N.A. Stern N.J. Hiett K.L. Berrang M.E. Identification of a new source of Campylobacter contamination in poultry: transmission from breeder hens to broiler chickens Avian Dis. 46 2002 535 541 12243515 10.1637/0005-2086(2002)046[0535:IOANSO]2.0.CO;2
Cox N.A. Stern N.J. Wilson J.L. Musgrove M.T. Buhr R.J. Hiett K.L. Isolation of Campylobacter spp. from semen samples of commercial broiler breeder roosters Avian Dis. 46 2002 717 720 12243539 10.1637/0005-2086(2002)046[0717:IOCSFS]2.0.CO;2
Dai L. Sahin O. Grover M. Zhang Q. New and alternative strategies for the prevention, control, and treatment of antibiotic-resistant Campylobacter Transl. Res. 223 2020 76 88 32438073 10.1016/j.trsl.2020.04.009 PMC7423705
Dale E.L. Nolan S.P. Berghaus R.D. Hofacre C.L. On farm prevention of Campylobacter and Salmonella: lessons learned from basic biosecurity interventions J. Appl. Poult. Res. 24 2015 222 232
D'angelantonio D. Scattolini S. Boni A. Neri D. Di Serafino G. Connerton P. Connerton I. Pomilio F. Di Giannatale E. Migliorati G. Aprea G. Bacteriophage therapy to reduce colonization of Campylobacter jejuni in broiler chickens before slaughter Viruses 13 2021 1428 34452294 10.3390/v13081428 PMC8402772
Da Rosa P.P. Ávila B.P. Angelo I.D.V. Chesini R.G. Fernandes T.A. da Silva Camacho J. Bugoni M. Roll V.F.B. Gularte M.A. Impact of different chicken meat production systems on consumers’ purchase perception Br. Poult. Sci. 62 2021 387 395 33251830 10.1080/00071668.2020.1857335
Dedieu L. Brunel J.M. Lorenzi V. Muselli A. Berti L. Bolla J.M. Antibacterial mode of action of the Daucus carota essential oil active compounds against Campylobacter jejuni and efflux-mediated drug resistance in Gram-negative bacteria Molecules 25 2020 5448 33233754 10.3390/molecules25225448 PMC7699865
Deng W. Dittoe D.K. Pavilidis H.O. Chaney W.E. Yang Y. Ricke S.C. Current perspectives and potential of probiotics to limit foodborne Campylobacter in poultry Front. Microbiol. 11 2020 583429 10.3389/fmicb.2020.583429 PMC7782433 33414767
de Zoete M.R. Keestra A.M. Roszczenko P. van Putten J.P. Activation of human and chicken toll-like receptors by Campylobacter spp Infect. Immun. 78 2010 1229 1238 20038539 10.1128/IAI.00897-09 PMC2825908
de Zoete M.R. van Putten J.P.M. Wagenaar J.A. Vaccination of chickens against Campylobacter Vaccine 25 2007 5548 5557 17224215 10.1016/j.vaccine.2006.12.002
Dhillon A.S. Shivaprasad H.L. Schaberg D. Wier F. Weber S. Bandli D. Campylobacter jejuni infection in broiler chickens Avian Dis. 50 2006 55 58 16617982 10.1637/7411-071405R.1
Di Giannatale E. Calistri P. Di Donato G. Decastelli L. Goffredo E. Adriano D. Mancini M.E. Galleggiante A. Neri D. Antoci S. Marfoglia C. Marotta F. Nuvoloni R. Migliorati G. Thermotolerant Campylobacter spp. in chicken and bovine meat in Italy: prevalence, level of contamination and molecular characterization of isolates PLoS One 14 2019 e0225957 10.1371/journal.pone.0225957 PMC6897410 31809529
Dion M.B. Oechslin F. Moineau S. Phage diversity, genomics and phylogeny Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 18 2020 125 138 32015529 10.1038/s41579-019-0311-5
Dipineto L. Gargiulo A. Russo T.P. De Luca Bossa L.M. Borrelli L. Menna L.F. Fioretti A. Campylobacter jejuni, Campylobacter coli, and cytolethal distending toxin genes in laying hens Avian Dis. 55 2011 103 105 21500644 10.1637/9525-091510-ResNote.1
Djennad A. Nichols G. Loiacono G. Fleming L. Kessel A. Kovats S. Lake I. Sarran C. Elson R. Lane C. Hoeser C. Bailey T. The seasonality and effects of temperature and rainfall on Campylobacter infections Int. J. Popul. Data Sci. 1 2017 034
Dogan O.B. Aditya A. Ortuzar J. Clarke J. Wang B. A systematic review and meta-analysis of the efficacy of processing stages and interventions for controlling Campylobacter contamination during broiler chicken processing Compr. Rev. Food Sci. Food Saf. 21 2022 227 271 34730272 10.1111/1541-4337.12860
Dogan O.B. Clark J. Mattos F. Wang B. A quantitative microbial risk assessment model of Campylobacter in broiler chickens: evaluating processing interventions Food Control 100 2019 97 110
Domingues A.R. Pires S.M. Halasa T. Hald T. Source attribution of human campylobacteriosis using a meta-analysis of case-control studies of sporadic infections Epidemiol. Infect. 140 2012 970 981 22214729 10.1017/S0950268811002676
Doyle M.L. Waldroup A.L. Microbiological evaluation of chlorine dioxide in commercial poultry plant Pages 97 in Proceedings of the 88th Annual Meeting of the Poultry Science Association Louisville, KY 1996
Duarte A. Alves A.C. Ferreira S. Silva F. Domingues F.C. Resveratrol inclusion complexes: antibacterial and anti-biofilm activity against Campylobacter spp. and Arcobacter butzleri Food Res. Int. 77 2015 244 250
Dubovitskaya O. Seinige D. Valero A. Reich F. Kehrenberg C. Quantitative assessment of Campylobacter spp. levels with real-time PCR methods at different stages of the broiler food chain Food Microbiol. 110 2023 104152 10.1016/j.fm.2022.104152 36462834
Duffy L.L. Blackall P.J. Cobbold R.N. Fegan N. Quantitative effects of in-line operations on Campylobacter and Escherichia coli through two Australian broiler processing plants Int. J. Food Microbiol. 188 2014 128 134 25104301 10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2014.07.024
EFSA (European Food Safety Authority) Analysis of the baseline survey on the prevalence of Campylobacter in broiler batches and of Campylobacter and Salmonella on broiler carcasses, in the EU, 2008-Part B: analysis of factors associated with Campylobacter colonisation of broiler batches and with Campylobacter contamination of broiler carcasses; and investigation of the culture method diagnostic characteristics used to analyze broiler carcass samples EFSA J. 8 2010 1522
EFSA (European Food Safety Authority) and ECDC (European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control) The European Union summary report on trends and sources of zoonoses, zoonotic agents and food-borne outbreaks in 2014 EFSA J. 13 2015 4329
EFSA (European Food Safety Authority) and ECDC (European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control) The European Union summary report on trends and sources of zoonoses, zoonotic agents and food-borne outbreaks in 2015 EFSA J. 14 2016 4634 10.2903/j.efsa.2017.5077 PMC7009962 32625371
EFSA (European Food Safety Authority) and ECDPC (European Centre of Disease Prevention and Control) The European Union one health 2018 zoonoses report EFSA J. 17 2019 5926 10.2903/j.efsa.2019.5926 PMC7055727 32626211
EFSA (European Food Safety Authority) and ECDC (European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control) The European Union one health 2019 zoonoses report EFSA J. 19 2021 e06406 33680134 10.2903/j.efsa.2021.6406 PMC7913300
EFSA (European Food Safety Authority) and ECDPC (European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control) The European Union one health 2020 zoonoses report EFSA J. 19 2021 6971 10.2903/j.efsa.2021.6971 PMC9624447 36329690
Elgamoudi B.A. Taha T. Korolik V. Inhibition of Campylobacter jejuni biofilm formation by D-amino acids Antibiotics 9 2020 836 33238583 10.3390/antibiotics9110836 PMC7700173
El Haddad L. Harb C.P. Gebara M.A. Stibich M.A. Chemaly R.F. A systematic and critical review of bacteriophage therapy against multidrug-resistant ESKAPE organisms in humans Clin. Infect. Dis. 69 2019 167 178 30395179 10.1093/cid/ciy947
Elhelw R. Elhariri M. Salem H.M. Khalefa H.S. Hamza D.A. Ahmed Z.S. Molecular screening of gastric Helicobacter pullorum recovered from different avian species in Egypt Pol. J. Vet. Sci. 25 2022 369 374 36155992 10.24425/pjvs.2022.142019
Ellerbroek L.I. Lienau J.A. Klein G. Campylobacter spp. in broiler flocks at farm level and the potential for cross-contamination during slaughter Zoonoses Public Health 57 2010 e81 e88 20880094 10.1111/j.1863-2378.2009.01267.x
Ellis-Iversen J. Jorgensen F. Bull S. Powell L. Cook A.J. Humphrey T.J. Risk factors for Campylobacter colonization during rearing of broiler flocks in Great Britain Prev. Vet. Med. 89 2009 178 184 19329201 10.1016/j.prevetmed.2009.02.004
Ellis-Iversen J. Ridley A. Morris V. Sowa A. Harris J. Atterbury R. Sparks N. Allen V. Persistent environmental reservoirs on farms as risk factors for Campylobacter in commercial poultry Epidemiol. Infect. 140 2012 916 924 21781366 10.1017/S095026881100118X
Engberg J. Aarestrup F.M. Taylor D.E. Gerner-Smidt P. Nachamkin I. Quinolone and macrolide resistance in Campylobacter jejuni and C. coli: resistance mechanisms and trends in human isolates Emerg. Infect. Dis. 7 2001 24 34 11266291 10.3201/eid0701.010104 PMC2631682
Erega A. Stefanic P. Dogsa I. Danevˇciˇc T. Simunovic K. Klanˇcnik A. Možina S.S. Mulec I.M. Bacillaene mediates the inhibitory effect of Bacillus subtilis on Campylobacter jejuni biofilms Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 87 2021 e0295520 10.1128/AEM.02955-20 PMC8174767 33837012
Eriksson D. Råhlén E. Bergenkvist E. Skarin M. Fernström L.L. Ryden J. Hansson I. Survival of Campylobacter jejuni in frozen chicken meat and risks associated with handling contaminated chicken in the kitchen Food Control 145 2023 109471
Evans S.J. Introduction and spread of thermophilic campylobacters in broiler flocks Vet. Rec. 131 1992 574 576 1287951
Evans S.J. Sayers A.R. A longitudinal study of Campylobacter infection of broiler flocks in Great Britain Prev. Vet. Med. 46 2000 209 223 10913805 10.1016/s0167-5877(00)00143-4
Facciolà A. Riso R. Avventuroso E. Visalli G. Delia S.A. Laganà P. Campylobacter: from microbiology to prevention J. Prev. Med. Hyg. 58 2017 E79 E92 28900347 PMC5584092
Firlieyanti A.S. Connerton P.L. Connerton I.F. Campylobacters and their bacteriophages from chicken liver: the prospect for phage biocontrol Int. J. Food Microbiol. 237 2016 121 127 27565524 10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2016.08.026 PMC5064024
Fletcher D.L. Craig E.W. Arnold J.W. An evaluation of on-line “reprocessing” on visual contamination and microbiological quality of broilers J. Appl. Poult. Res. 6 1997 436 442
Furukawa I. Ishihara T. Teranishi H. Saito S. Yatsuyanagi J. Wada E. Kumagai Y. Takahashi S. Konno T. Kashio H. Kobayashi A. Kato N. Hayashi K. Fukushima K. Ishikawa K. Horikawa K. Oishi A. Izumiya H. Ohnishi T. Konishi Y. Kuroki T. Prevalence and characteristics of Salmonella and Campylobacter in retail poultry meat in Japan Jpn. J. Infect. Dis. 70 2017 239 247 27580577 10.7883/yoken.JJID.2016.164
Gahamanyi N. Song D.-G. Cha K.H. Yoon K.-Y. Mboera L.E.G. Matee M.I. Mutangana D. Amachawadi R.G. Komba E.V.G. Pan C.-H. Susceptibility of Campylobacter strains to selected natural products and frontline antibiotics Antibiotics 9 2020 790 33182474 10.3390/antibiotics9110790 PMC7697650
García-Sánchez L. Melero B. Diez A.M. Jaime I. Canepa A. Rovira J. Genotyping, virulence genes and antimicrobial resistance of Campylobacter spp. isolated during two seasonal periods in Spanish poultry farms Prev. Vet. Med. 176 2020 104935 10.1016/j.prevetmed.2020.104935 32109783
García-Sánchez L. Melero B. Diez A.M. Jaime I. Rovira J. Characterization of Campylobacter species in Spanish retail from different fresh chicken products and their antimicrobial resistance J. Food Microbiol. 76 2018 457 465 10.1016/j.fm.2018.07.004 30166174
García-Sánchez L. Melero B. Jaime I. Hänninen M.L. Rossi M. Rovira J. Campylobacter jejuni survival in a poultry processing plant environment Food Microbiol. 65 2017 185 192 28400001 10.1016/j.fm.2017.02.009
García-Sánchez L. Melero B. Jaime I. Rossi M. Ortega I. Rovira J. Biofilm formation, virulence and antimicrobial resistance of different Campylobacter jejuni isolates from a poultry slaughterhouse Food Microbiol. 83 2019 193 199 31202413 10.1016/j.fm.2019.05.016
Gencay Y.E. Sørensen M.C.H. Wenzel C.Q. Szymanski C.M. Brøndsted L. Phase variable expression of a single phage receptor in Campylobacter jejuni NCTC12662 influences sensitivity toward several diverse CPS-dependent phages Front. Microbiol. 9 2018 82 29467727 10.3389/fmicb.2018.00082 PMC5808241
Giangaspero M. A cosmopolitan one health issue: campylobacteriosis Clin. Microbiol. 7 2018 1
Gichure J.N. Njage P.M.K. Wambui J.M. Dykes G.A. Buys E.M. Coorey R. Systematic-review and meta-analysis on effect of decontamination interventions on prevalence and concentration of Campylobacter spp. during primary processing of broiler chickens Food Microbiol. 102 2022 103923 10.1016/j.fm.2021.103923 34809949
Golden C.E. Mishra A. Prevalence of Salmonella and Campylobacter spp. in alternative and conventionally produced chicken in the United States: a systematic review and meta-analysis J. Food Prot. 83 2020 1181 1197 32294168 10.4315/JFP-19-538
Golz J.C. Epping L. Knüver M.T. Borowiak M. Hartkopf F. Deneke C. Malorny B. Semmler T. Stingl K. Whole genome sequencing reveals extended natural transformation in Campylobacter impacting diagnostics and the pathogens adaptive potential Sci. Rep. 10 2020 3686 32111893 10.1038/s41598-020-60320-y PMC7048796
Gölz G. Kittler S. Malakauskas M. Alter T. Survival of Campylobacter in the food chain and the environment Curr. Clin. Microbiol. Rep. 5 2018 126 134
Gonzalez-Fandos E. Maya N. Martínez-Laorden A. Perez-Arnedo I. Efficacy of lactic acid and modified atmosphere packaging against Campylobacter jejuni on chicken during refrigerated storage Foods 9 2020 109 31968597 10.3390/foods9010109 PMC7022977
Gorain C. Singh A. Bhattacharyya S. Kundu A. Lahiri A. Gupta S. Mallick A.I. Mucosal delivery of live Lactococcus lactis expressing functionally active JlpA antigen induces potent local immune response and prevent enteric colonization of Campylobacter jejuni in chickens Vaccine 38 2020 1630 1642 31932136 10.1016/j.vaccine.2019.12.064
Greene G. Koolman L. Whyte P. Lynch H. Coffey A. Lucey B. Egan J. O'Connor L. Bolton D. The efficacy of organic acid, medium chain fatty acid and essential oil-based broiler treatments; in vitro anti-Campylobacter jejuni activity and the effect of these chemical-based treatments on broiler performance J. Appl. Microbiol. 132 2022 687 695 34218482 10.1111/jam.15204
Gregory E. Barnhart H. Dreesen D.W. Stern N.J. Corn J.L. Epidemiological study of Campylobacter spp. in broilers: source, time of colonization, and prevalence Avian Dis. 41 1997 890 898 9454923
Guccione E. Leon-Kempis M.D.R. Pearson B.M. Hitchin E. Mulholland F. Van Diemen P.M. Stevens M.P. Kelly D.J. Amino acid-dependent growth of Campylobacter jejuni: key roles for aspartase (AspA) under microaerobic and oxygen-limited conditions and identification of AspB (Cj0762), essential for growth on glutamate Mol. Microbiol. 69 2008 77 93 18433445 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2008.06263.x
Guerin M.T. Sir C. Sargeant J.M. Waddell L. O'Connor A.M. Wills R.W. Bailey R.H. Byrd J.A. The change in prevalence of Campylobacter on chicken carcasses during processing: a systematic review Poult. Sci. 89 2010 1070 1084 20371862 10.3382/ps.2009-00213
Guyard-Nicodème M. Keita A. Quesne S. Amelot M. Poezevara T. Le Berre B. Sánchez J. Vesseur P. Martín Á. Medel P. Chemaly M. Efficacy of feed additives against Campylobacter in live broilers during the entire rearing period Poult. Sci 95 2016 298 305 26706356 10.3382/ps/pev303
Habib I. Ibrahim Mohamed M.Y. Ghazawi A. Lakshmi G.B. Khan M. Li D. Sahibzada S. Genomic characterization of molecular markers associated with antimicrobial resistance and virulence of the prevalent Campylobacter coli isolated from retail chicken meat in the United Arab Emirates Curr. Res. Food Sci. 6 2023 100434 10.1016/j.crfs.2023.100434 PMC9850066 36687171
Hakeem M.J. Feng J. Nilghaz A. Ma L. Seah H.C. Konkel M.E. Lu X. Active packaging of immobilized zinc oxide nanoparticles controls Campylobacter jejuni in raw chicken meat Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 86 2020 e01195-20 10.1128/AEM.01195-20 PMC7642087 32887715
Hakeem M.J. Lu X. Survival and control of Campylobacter in poultry production environment Front. Cell. Infect. Microbiol. 10 2021 615049 10.3389/fcimb.2020.615049 PMC7879573 33585282
Hald B. Skov M.N. Nielsen E.M. Rahbek C. Madsen J.J. Wainø M. Chriél M. Nordentoft S. Baggesen D.L. Madsen M. Campylobacter jejuni and Campylobacter coli in wild birds on Danish livestock farms Acta Vet. Scand. 58 2016 11 26842400 10.1186/s13028-016-0192-9 PMC4739333
Hald B. Skovgård H. Bang D.D. Pedersen K. Dybdahl J. Jespersen J.B. Madsen M. Flies and Campylobacter infection of broiler flocks Emerg. Infect. Dis. 10 2004 1490 1492 15496257 10.3201/eid1008.040129 PMC3320412
Hald B. Skovgård H. Pedersen K. Bunkenborg H. Influxed insects as vectors for Campylobacter jejuni and Campylobacter coli in Danish broiler houses Poult. Sci. 87 2008 1428 1434 18577626 10.3382/ps.2007-00301
Han J. Molecular mechanisms involved in the emergence and fitness of fluoroquinolone-resistant Campylobacter jejuni. PhD Dissertation 2009 Iowa State University Ames, USA
Han J. Wang Y. Sahin O. Shen Z. Guo B. Shen J. Zhang Q. A fluoroquinolone resistance associated mutation in gyrA affects DNA supercoiling in Campylobacter jejuni Front. Cell Infect. Microbiol. 2 2012 21 22919613 10.3389/fcimb.2012.00021 PMC3417464
Hankel J. Gibson T. Skov J. Andersen K.B. Dargatz M. Kappel A. Thiemann F. Curtis B. Chuppava B. Visscher C. Monitoring of Campylobacter jejuni in a chicken infection model by measuring specific volatile organic compounds and by qPCR Sci. Rep. 12 2022 1175 35821260 10.1038/s41598-022-15863-7 PMC9276820
Hansson I. Ederoth M. Andersson L. Vagsholm I. Engvall E.O. Transmission of Campylobacter spp. to chickens during transport to slaughter J. Appl. Microbiol. 99 2005 1149 1157 16238745 10.1111/j.1365-2672.2005.02689.x
Hansson I. Engvall E.O. Lindblad J. Gunnarsson A. Vagsholm I. Surveillance programme for Campylobacter species in Swedish broilers, July 2001 to June 2002 Vet. Rec. 155 2004 193 196 15368754 10.1136/vr.155.7.193
Hansson I. Forshell L.P. Gustafsson P. Boqvist S. Lindblad J. Engvall E.O. Andersson Y. Vågsholm I. Summary of the Swedish Campylobacter program in broilers, 2001 through 2005 J. Food Prot. 70 2007 2008 2014 17900076 10.4315/0362-028x-70.9.2008
Hansson I. Pudas N. Harbom B. Engvall E.O. Within-flock variations of Campylobacter loads in caeca and on carcasses from broilers Int. J. Food Microbiol. 141 2010 51 55 20493571 10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2010.04.019
Harris K. Taylor S. DiPietro R.B. Antecedents and outcomes of restaurant employees’ food safety intervention behaviors Int. J. Hosp. Manag. 94 2021 102858
Harrison D. Corry J.E.L. Tchórzewska M.A. Morris V.K. Hutchison M.L. Freezing as an intervention to reduce the numbers of Campylobacter isolated from chicken livers Lett. Appl. Microbiol. 57 2013 206 213 23647008 10.1111/lam.12098
Haughton P.N. Lyng J. Cronin D. Fanning S. Whyte P. Effect of crust freezing applied alone and in combination with ultraviolet light on the survival of Campylobacter on raw chicken Food Microbiol. 32 2012 147 151 22850386 10.1016/j.fm.2012.05.004
Hazeleger W. Arkesteijn C. Toorop-Bouma A. Beumer R. Detection of the coccoid form of Campylobacter jejuni in chicken products with the use of the polymerase chain reaction Int. J. Food Microbiol. 24 1994 273 281 7703020 10.1016/0168-1605(94)90125-2
Hazeleger W.C. Bolder N.M. Beumer R.R. Jacobs-Reitsma W.F. Darkling beetles (Alphitobius diaperinus) and their larvae as potential vectors for the transfer of Campylobacter jejuni and Salmonella enterica serovar paratyphi B variant Java between successive broiler flocks Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 74 2008 6887 6891 18791034 10.1128/AEM.00451-08 PMC2583492
Hazeleger W.C. Wouters J.A. Rombouts F.M. Abee T. Physiological activity of Campylobacter jejuni far below the minimal growth temperature Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 64 1998 3917 3922 9758819 10.1128/aem.64.10.3917-3922.1998 PMC106578
Helmy Y.A. Closs Jr G. Jung K. Kathayat D. Vlasova A. Rajashekara G. Effect of probiotic E. coli Nissle 1917 supplementation on the growth performance, immune responses, intestinal morphology, and gut microbes of Campylobacter jejuni infected chickens Infect. Immun. 90 2022 e0033722 10.1128/iai.00337-22 PMC9584303 36135600
Herman L. Heyndrickx M. Grijspeerdt K. Vandekerchove D. Rollier I. De Zutter L. Routes for Campylobacter contamination of poultry meat: epidemiological study from hatchery to slaughterhouse Epidemiol. Infect. 131 2003 1169 1180 14959785 10.1017/s0950268803001183 PMC2870067
Hermans D. Pasmans F. Messens W. Martel A. Van Immerseel F. Rasschaert G. Heyndrickx M. Van Deun K. Haesebrouck F. Poultry as a host for the zoonotic pathogen Campylobacter jejuni Vector Borne Zoonotic Dis. 12 2012 89 98 22133236 10.1089/vbz.2011.0676
Hermans D. Van Deun K. Messens W. Martel A. Van Immerseel F. Haesebrouck F. Rasschaert G. Heyndrickx M. Pasmans F. Campylobacter control in poultry by current intervention measures ineffective: urgent need for intensified fundamental research Vet. Microbiol. 152 2011 219 228 21482043 10.1016/j.vetmic.2011.03.010
Heuer O.E. Pedersen K. Andersen J.S. Madsen M. Prevalence and antimicrobial susceptibility of thermophilic Campylobacter in organic and conventional broiler flocks Lett. Appl. Microbiol. 33 2001 269 274 11559399 10.1046/j.1472-765x.2001.00994.x
Hiett K.L. Cox N.A. Buhr R.J. Stern N.J. Genotype analyses of Campylobacter isolated from distinct segments of the reproductive tracts of broiler breeder hens Curr. Microbiol. 45 2002 400 404 12402079 10.1007/s00284-002-3771-0
Hiett K.L. Cox N.A. Stern N.J. Direct polymerase chain reaction detection of Campylobacter spp. in poultry hatchery samples Avian Dis. 46 2002 219 223 11922339 10.1637/0005-2086(2002)046[0219:DPCRDO]2.0.CO;2
Hiett K.L. Stern N.J. Fedorka-Cray P. Cox N.A. Musgrove M.T. Ladely S. Molecular subtype analyses of Campylobacter spp. from Arkansas and California poultry operations Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 68 2002 6220 6236 12450847 10.1128/AEM.68.12.6220-6236.2002 PMC134383
Higham L.E. Scott C. Akehurst K. Dring D. Parnham A. Waterman M. Bright A. Effects of financial incentives and cessation of thinning on prevalence of Campylobacter: a longitudinal monitoring study on commercial broiler farms in the UK Vet. Rec. 183 2018 595-595 10.1136/vr.104823 30171100
Hofreuter D. Defining the metabolic requirements for the growth and colonization capacity of Campylobacter jejuni Front. Cell Infect. Microbiol. 4 2014 137-137 10.3389/fcimb.2014.00137 PMC4178425 25325018
Hofshagen M. Kruse H. Reduction in flock prevalence of Campylobacter spp. in broilers in Norway after implementation of an action plan J. Food Prot. 68 2005 2220 2223 16245734 10.4315/0362-028x-68.10.2220
Hong S.H. Seo K.H. Yoon S.H. Kim S.K. Chon J. Gold nanoparticle and polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-based colorimetric assay for the identification of Campylobacter spp. in chicken carcass Food Sci. Anim. Resour. 43 2023 73 84 36789201 10.5851/kosfa.2022.e59 PMC9890362
Hsieh Y.H. Simpson S. Kerdahi K. Sulaiman I.M. A comparative evaluation study of growth conditions for culturing the isolates of Campylobacter spp Curr. Microbiol. 75 2018 71 78 28887647 10.1007/s00284-017-1351-6
Hue O. Bouquin S.Le Laisney M.J. Allain V. Lalande F. Petetin I. Rouxel S. Quesne S. Gloaguen P.Y. Picherot M. Santolini J. Salvat G. Bougeard S. Chemaly M. Prevalence of and risk factors for Campylobacter spp. contamination of broiler chicken carcasses at the slaughterhouse Food Microbiol. 27 2010 992 999 20832676 10.1016/j.fm.2010.06.004
Hughes R.A. Hallett K. Cogan T. Enser M. Humphrey T. The response of Campylobacter jejuni to low temperature differs from that of Escherichia coli Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 75 2009 6292 6298 19648365 10.1128/AEM.00993-09 PMC2753088
Huneau-Salaun A. Denis M. Balaine L. Salvat G. Risk factors for Campylobacter spp. colonization in French free-range broiler-chicken flocks at the end of the indoor rearing period Prev. Vet. Med. 80 2007 34 48 17346830 10.1016/j.prevetmed.2007.02.001
Hwang H. Singer R.S. Survey of the U.S. broiler industry regarding pre- and postharvest interventions targeted to mitigate Campylobacter contamination on broiler chicken products J. Food Prot. 83 2020 1137 1148 32084667 10.4315/JFP-19-527
Ibrahim D. Sewid A.H. Arisha A.H. Abd El-Fattah A.H. Abdelaziz A.M. Al-Jabr O.A. Kishawy A.T.Y. Influence of Glycyrrhiza glabra extract on growth, gene expression of gut integrity, and Campylobacter jejuni colonization in broiler chickens Front. Vet. Sci. 7 2020 612063 10.3389/fvets.2020.612063 PMC7782238 33415133
Ica T. Caner V. Istanbullu O. Nguyen H.D. Ahmed B. Call D.R. Beyenal H. Characterization of mono-and mixed-culture Campylobacter jejuni biofilms Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 78 2012 1033 1038 22179238 10.1128/AEM.07364-11 PMC3273011
Ijaz U.Z. Sivaloganathan L. McKenna A. Richmond A. Kelly C. Linton M. Stratakos A.C. Lavery U. Elmi A. Wren B.W. Dorrell N. Corcionivoschi N. Gundogdu O. Comprehensive longitudinal microbiome analysis of the chicken cecum reveals a shift from competitive to environmental drivers and a window of opportunity for Campylobacter Front. Microbiol. 9 2018 2452 30374341 10.3389/fmicb.2018.02452 PMC6196313
Ingresa-Capaccioni S. Jim´enez-Trigos E. Marco-Jim´enez F. Catal´a P. Vega S. Marin C. Campylobacter epidemiology from breeders to their progeny in Eastern Spain Poult. Sci. 95 2016 676 683 26628341 10.3382/ps/pev338
ISO Microbiology of the Food Chain-Horizontal Method for the Detection and Enumeration of Listeria Monocytogenes and of Listeria Spp. – Part 2: Enumeration Method. ISO Norm 11290-2:2017 2017 International Organization for Standardization Geneva, Switzerland
ISO Microbiology of the Food Chain-Horizontal Method for the Detection and Enumeration of Listeria Monocytogenes and of Listeria Spp. – Part 1: Detection Method. ISO Norm 11290-1:2017 2017 International Organization for Standardization Geneva, Switzerland
Ito S. Kishimoto M. Development of a sampling and real-time PCR method for the quantitative detection of Campylobacter spp. in retail chicken meat without DNA extraction J. Food Prot. 86 2023 100028 10.1016/j.jfp.2022.100028 36916587
Iwata T. Watanabe-Yanai A. Tamamura-Andoh Y. Arai N. Akiba M. Kusumoto M. Tryptanthrin reduces Campylobacter jejuni colonization in the chicken gut by a bactericidal mechanism Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 89 2023 1701 1722 10.1128/aem.01701-22 PMC9973028 36651742
Izat A.L. Gardner F.A. Denton J.H. Golan F.A. Incidence and level of Campylobacter jejuni in broiler processing Poult. Sci. 67 1988 1568 1572 3237574 10.3382/ps.0671568
Johannessen G.S. Garofolo G. Di Serafino G. Koláčková I. Karpíšková R. Wieczorek K. Osek J. Christensen J. Torp M. Hoorfar J. Campylobacter in chicken – critical parameters for international, multicentre evaluation of air sampling and detection methods Food Microbiol. 90 2020 103455 10.1016/j.fm.2020.103455 32336358
Johnsen G. Kruse H. Hofshagen M. Genetic diversity and description of transmission routes for Campylobacter on broiler farms by amplified-fragment length polymorphism J. Appl. Microbiol. 101 2006 1130 1139 17040237 10.1111/j.1365-2672.2006.02995.x
Johnson T.J. Shank J.M. Johnson J.G. Current and potential treatments for reducing Campylobacter colonization in animal hosts and disease in humans Front. Microbiol. 8 2017 487 28386253 10.3389/fmicb.2017.00487 PMC5362611
Josefsen M.H. Bhunia A.K. Engvall E.O. Fachmann M.S.R. Hoorfar J. Monitoring Campylobacter in the poultry production chain-from culture to genes and beyond J. Microbiol. Methods 112 2015 118 125 25771343 10.1016/j.mimet.2015.03.007
Kaakoush N.O. Castaño-Rodríguez N. Mitchell H.M. Man S.M. Global epidemiology of Campylobacter infection Clin. Microbiol. Rev. 28 2015 687 720 26062576 10.1128/CMR.00006-15 PMC4462680
Karki A.B. Wells H. Fakhr M.K. Retail liver juices enhance the survivability of Campylobacter jejuni and Campylobacter coli at low temperatures Sci. Rep. 9 2019 2733 30804407 10.1038/s41598-018-35820-7 PMC6389972
Kassenborg H.D. Smith K.E. Vugia D.J. Rabatsky-Ehr T. Bates M.R. Carter M.A. Dumas N.B. Cassidy M.P. Marano N. Tauxe R.V. Angulo F.J. Emerging Infections Program FoodNet Working Group Fluoroquinolone-resistant Campylobacter infections: eating poultry outside of the home and foreign travel are risk factors Clin. Infect. Dis. 38 Suppl. 3 2004 S279 S284 15095200 10.1086/381597
Katsma W.E. De Koeijer A.A. Jacobs-Reitsma W.F. Mangen M.J. Wagenaar J.A. Assessing interventions to reduce the risk of Campylobacter prevalence in broilers Risk Anal. 27 2007 863 876 17958497 10.1111/j.1539-6924.2007.00928.x
Kemp G.K. Aldrich M.L. Guerra M.L. Schneider K.R. Continuous online processing of fecal-and ingesta-contaminated poultry carcasses using an acidified sodium chlorite antimicrobial intervention J. Food Prot. 64 2001 807 812 11403130 10.4315/0362-028x-64.6.807
Kers J.G. Velkers F.C. Fischer E.A.J. Hermes G.D.A. Stegeman J.A. Host and environmental factors affecting the intestinal microbiota in chickens Front. Microbiol. 9 2018 235 29503637 10.3389/fmicb.2018.00235 PMC5820305
Khan S. Moore R.J. Stanley D. Chousalkar K.K. The gut microbiota of laying hens and its manipulation with prebiotics and probiotics to enhance gut health and food safety Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 86 2020 e00600-20 10.1128/AEM.00600-20 PMC7301851 32332137
Khan J.A. Rathore R.S. Abulreesh H.H. Qais F.A. Ahmad I. Prevalence and antibiotic resistance profiles of Campylobacter jejuni isolated from poultry meat and related samples at retail shops in Northern India Foodborne Pathog. Dis. 15 2018 218 225 29377719 10.1089/fpd.2017.2344
Kingsbury J.M. Horn B. Armstrong B. Midwinter A. Biggs P. Callander M. K.Mulqueen M.Brooks van der Logt P. Biggs R. The impact of primary and secondary processing steps on Campylobacter concentrations on chicken carcasses and portions Food Microbiol. 110 2023 104168 10.1016/j.fm.2022.104168 36462824
Kittler S. Shakeri G. Peh E. Plötz M. A one health perspective on a multi-hurdle approach to combat Campylobacter spp. in broiler meat Curr. Clin. Micro. Rep. 8 2021 49 61
Kittler S. Steffan S. Peh E. Plötz M. Phage biocontrol of Campylobacter: a one health approach Curr. Top. Microbiol. Immunol. 431 2021 127 168 33620651 10.1007/978-3-030-65481-8_6
Klančnik A. Šimunović K. Sterniša M. Ramić D. Možina S.Smole Bucar F. Anti-adhesion activity of phytochemicals to prevent Campylobacter jejuni biofilm formation on abiotic surfaces Phytochem. Rev. 20 2021 55 84
Klančnik A. Vučković D. Jamnik P. Abram M. Možina S.S. Stress response and virulence of heat-stressed Campylobacter jejuni Microb. Environ. 29 2014 338 345 10.1264/jsme2.ME14020 PMC4262356 25273228
Klančnik A. Vučković D. Plankl M. Abram M. Smole Možina S. In vivo modulation of Campylobacter jejuni virulence in response to environmental stress Foodborne Pathog. Dis. 10 2013 566 572 23638846 10.1089/fpd.2012.1298
Korsak D. Maćkiw E. Rożynek E. Żyłowska M. Prevalence of Campylobacter spp. in retail chicken, Turkey, pork, and beef meat in Poland between 2009 and 2013 J. Food Prot. 78 2015 1024 1028 25951401 10.4315/0362-028X.JFP-14-353
Koutsoumanis K. Allende A. Alvarez-Ordóñez A. Bolton D. Bover-Cid S. Davies R. Cesare A.D. Herman L. Hilbert F. Lindqvist R. Nauta M. Peixe L. Ru G. Simmons M. Skandamis P. Suffredini E. Alter T. Crotta M. Ellis-Iversen J. Hempen M. Messens W. Chemaly M. Update and review of control options for Campylobacter in broilers at primary production EFSA J. 18 2020 e06090 32874298 10.2903/j.efsa.2020.6090 PMC7448041
Kovács J.K. Felső P. Horváth G. Schmidt J. Dorn Á. Ábrahám H. Cox A. Márk L. Emődy L. Kovács T. Schneider G. Stress response and virulence potential modulating effect of peppermint essential oil in Campylobacter jejuni Biomed. Res. Int. 2019 2019 2971741 10.1155/2019/2971741 PMC6335803 30719441
Kovács J.K. Felső P. Makszin L. Pápai Z. Horváth G. Ábrahám H. Palkovics T. Böszörményi A. Emődy L. Schneider G. Antimicrobial and virulence-modulating effects of clove essential oil on the foodborne pathogen Campylobacter jejuni Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 82 2016 6158 6166 27520816 10.1128/AEM.01221-16 PMC5068167
Lahti E. Rehn M. Ockborn G. Hansson I. Ågren J. Engvall E.O. Jernberg C. Outbreak of campylobacteriosis following a dairy farm visit: confirmation by genotyping Foodborne Pathog. Dis. 14 2017 326 332 28350214 10.1089/fpd.2016.2257
Larson C.L. Shah D.H. Dhillon A.S. Call D.R. Ahn S. Haldorson G.J. Davitt C. Konkel M.E. Campylobacter jejuni invade chicken LMH cells inefficiently and stimulate differential expression of the chicken CXCLi1 and CXCLi2 cytokines Microbiology 154 2008 3835 3847 19047751 10.1099/mic.0.2008/021279-0
Lawes J.R. Vidal A. Clifton-Hadley F.A. Sayers R. Rodgers J. Snow L. Evans S.J. Powell L.F. Investigation of prevalence and risk factors for Campylobacter in broiler flocks at slaughter: results from a UK survey Epidemiol. Infect. 140 2012 1725 1737 22631874 10.1017/S0950268812000982
Lee S.K. Park H.J. Lee J.H. Lim J.S. Seo K.H. Heo E.J. Kim Y.J. Wee S.H. Moon J.S. Distribution and molecular characterization of Campylobacter species at different processing stages in two poultry processing plants Foodborne Pathog. Dis. 14 2017 141 147 28151001 10.1089/fpd.2016.2218
Li Y.P. Ingmer H. Madsen M. Bang D.D. Cytokine responses in primary chicken embryo intestinal cells infected with Campylobacter jejuni strains of human and chicken origin and the expression of bacterial virulence associated genes BMC Microbiol. 8 2008 107 18588667 10.1186/1471-2180-8-107 PMC2443369
Lianou A. Panagou E.Z. Nychas G.J.E. Meat safety—I foodborne pathogens and other biological issues Toldra´ F. Pages 521–552 in Lawrie’s Meat Science 8th ed 2017 Woodhead Publishing Sawston, United Kingdom
Lin J. Novel approaches for Campylobacter control in poultry Foodborne Pathog. Dis. 6 2009 755 765 19425824 10.1089/fpd.2008.0247 PMC3145176
Lindblad M. Hansson I. Vågsholm I. Lindqvist R. Postchill Campylobacter prevalence on broiler carcasses in relation to slaughter group colonization level and chilling system J. Food Prot. 69 2006 495 499 16541677 10.4315/0362-028x-69.3.495
Lindqvist R. Cha W. Dryselius R. Lahti E. The temporal pattern and relationship of Campylobacter prevalence in broiler slaughter batches and human campylobacteriosis cases in Sweden 2009–2019 Int. J. Food Microbiol. 378 2022 109823 10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2022.109823 35792470
Line J.E. Influence of relative humidity on transmission of Campylobacter jejuni in broiler chickens Poult. Sci. 85 2006 1145 1150 16830853 10.1093/ps/85.7.1145
Luangtongkum T. Jeon B. Han J. Plummer P. Logue C.M. Zhang Q. Antibiotic resistance in Campylobacter: emergence, transmission and persistence Future Microbiol. 4 2009 189 200 19257846 10.2217/17460913.4.2.189 PMC2691575
Luc D. Michel B.J. Vanina L. Alain M. Liliane B. Jean M.B. Antibacterial mode of action of the Daucus carota essential oil active compounds against Campylobacter jejuni and efflux mediated drug resistance in gram-negative bacteria Molecules 25 2020 5448 33233754 10.3390/molecules25225448 PMC7699865
Luo N. Sahin O. Lin J. Michel L.O. Zhang Q. In vivo selection of Campylobacter isolates with high levels of fluoroquinolone resistance associated with gyrA mutations and the function of the CmeABC efflux pump Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 47 2003 390 394 12499221 10.1128/AAC.47.1.390-394.2003 PMC148968
Lv R. Wang K. Feng J. Heeney D.D. Liu D. Lu X. Detection and quantification of viable but non-culturable Campylobacter jejuni Front. Microbiol. 10 2020 2920 31998253 10.3389/fmicb.2019.02920 PMC6965164
Lynch H. Franklin-Hayes P. Koolman L. Egan J. Gutierrez M. Byrne W. Golden O. Bolton D. Reid P. Coffey A. Lucey B. O'Connor L. Unger K. Whyte P. Prevalence and levels of Campylobacter in broiler chicken batches and carcasses in Ireland in 2017–2018 Int. J. Food Microbiol. 372 2022 109693 10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2022.109693 35490507
Lynch C.T. Lynch H. Egan J. Whyte P. Bolton D. Coffey A. Lucey B. Antimicrobial resistance of Campylobacter isolates recovered from broilers in the Republic of Ireland in 2017 and 2018: an update Br. Poult. Sci. 61 2020 550 556 32329627 10.1080/00071668.2020.1758300
Lyngstad T.M. Jonsson M.E. Hofshagen M. Heier B.T. Risk factors associated with the presence of Campylobacter species in Norwegian broiler flocks Poult. Sci. 87 2008 1987 1994 18809860 10.3382/ps.2008-00132
Ma L. Wang Y. Shen J. Zhang Q. Wu C. Tracking Campylobacter contamination along a broiler chicken production chain from the farm level to retail in China Int. J. Food Microbiol. 181 2014 77 84 24831929 10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2014.04.023
Mäesaar M. Praakle K. Meremäe K. Kramarenko T. Sõgel J. Viltrop A. Muutra K. Kovalenko K. Matt D. Hörman A. Hänninen M.L. Roasto M. Prevalence and counts of Campylobacter spp. in poultry meat at retail level in Estonia Food Cont. 44 2014 72 77
Mainali C. Gensler G. McFall M. King R. Irwin R. Senthilselvan A. Evaluation of associations between feed withdrawal and other management factors with Salmonella contamination of broiler chickens at slaughter in Alberta J. Food Prot. 72 2009 2202 2207 19833047 10.4315/0362-028x-72.10.2202
Malavi D.N. Abong G.O. Muzhingi T. Effect of food safety training on behavior change of food handlers: a case of orange-fleshed sweet potato purée processing in Kenya Food Control 119 2021 107500 10.1016/j.foodcont.2020.107500 PMC7607239 33390669
Mañes-Lázaro R. Van Diemen P.M. Pin C. Mayer M.J. Stevens M.P. Narbad A. Administration of Lactobacillus johnsonii FI9785 to chickens affects colonization by Campylobacter jejuni and the intestinal microbiota Br. Poult. Sci. 58 2017 373 381 28318296 10.1080/00071668.2017.1307322
Marotta F. Garofolo G. Di Donato G. Aprea G. Platone I. Cianciavicchia S. Alessiani A. Di Giannatale E. Population diversity of Campylobacter jejuni in poultry and its dynamic of contamination in chicken meat BioMed. Res. Int. 2015 859845 10.1155/2015/859845 PMC4620384 26543870
Mazengia E. Fisk C. Liao G. Huang H. Meschke J. Direct observational study of the risk of cross-contamination during raw poultry handling: practices in private homes Food Prot. Trends 35 2015 8 23
McDougald D. Rice S.A. Barraud N. Steinberg P.D. Kjelleberg S. Should we stay or should we go: mechanisms and ecological consequences for biofilm dispersal Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 10 2012 39 50 10.1038/nrmicro2695 22120588
McDowell S.W. Menzies F.D. McBride S.H. Oza A.N. McKenna J.P. Gordon A.W. Neill S.D. Campylobacter spp. in conventional broiler flocks in Northern Ireland: epidemiology and risk factors Prev. Vet. Med. 84 2008 261 276 18249451 10.1016/j.prevetmed.2007.12.010
McKenna A. Ijaz U.Z. Kelly C. Linton M. Sloan W.T. Green B.D. Lavery U. Dorrell N. Wren B.W. Richmond A. Corcionivoschi N. Gundogdu O. Impact of industrial production system parameters on chicken microbiomes: mechanisms to improve performance and reduce Campylobacter Microbiome 8 2020 128 32907634 10.1186/s40168-020-00908-8 PMC7488076
Mead G.C. Factors affecting intestinal colonization of poultry by Campylobacter and role of microflora in control World's Poult. Sci. J. 58 2002 169 178
Meade K.G. Narciandi F. Cahalane S. Reiman C. Allan B. O'Farrelly C. Comparative in vivo infection models yield insights on early host immune response to Campylobacter in chickens Immunogenetics 61 2009 101 110 19082824 10.1007/s00251-008-0346-7
Mendes Â.J. Santos-Ferreira N.L. Costa F.M. Lopes E.P. Freitas-Silva J. Inácio Â.S. Moreira F. Martins da Costa P. External contamination of broilers by Campylobacter spp. increases from the farm to the slaughterhouse Br. Poult. Sci. 61 2020 550 556 32106712 10.1080/00071668.2020.1736264
Messens W. Herman L. De Zutter L. Heyndrickx M. Multiple typing for the epidemiological study of contamination of broilers with thermotolerant Campylobacter Vet. Microbiol. 138 2009 120 131 19303724 10.1016/j.vetmic.2009.02.012
Meunier M. Guyard-Nicodème M. Vigouroux E. Poezevara T. Beven V. Quesne S. Bigault L. Amelot M. Dory D. Chemaly M. Promising new vaccine candidates against Campylobacter in broilers PLoS One 12 2017 e0188472 10.1371/journal.pone.0188472 PMC5703506 29176789
Mezher Z. Saccares S. Marcianò R. De Santis P. Rodas E.M. De Angelis V. Condoleo R. Occurrence of Campylobacter spp. in poultry meat at retail and processing plants’ levels in Central Italy Ital. J. Food Saf. 5 2016 5495 27800429 10.4081/ijfs.2016.5495 PMC5076705
Montrose M.S. Shane S.M. Harrington K.S. Role of litter in the transmission of Campylobacter jejuni Avian Dis. 29 1985 392 399 4026733
Morgan-Linnell S.K. Becnel Boyd L. Steffen D. Zechiedrich L. Mechanisms accounting for fluoroquinolone resistance in Escherichia coli clinical isolates Antimicrob. Agents Chemother. 53 2009 235 241 18838592 10.1128/AAC.00665-08 PMC2612180
Morrow A.L. Ruiz-Palacios G.M. Jiang X. Newburg D.S. Human-milk glycans that inhibit pathogen binding protect breast-feeding infants against infectious diarrhea J. Nutr. 135 2005 1304 1307 15867329 10.1093/jn/135.5.1304
Mota-Gutierrez J. Lis L. Lasagabaster A. Nafarrate I. Ferrocino I. Cocolin L. Rantsiou K. Campylobacter spp. prevalence and mitigation strategies in the broiler production chain Food Microbiol. 104 2022 103998 10.1016/j.fm.2022.103998 35287817
Musavian H.S. Krebs N.H. Nonboe U. Corry J.E. Purnell G. Combined steam and ultrasound treatment of broilers at slaughter: a promising intervention to significantly reduce numbers of naturally occurring campylobacters on carcasses Int. J. Food Microbiol. 176 2014 23 28 24561390 10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2014.02.001
Myintzaw P. Jaiswal A.K. Jaiswal S. A review on campylobacteriosis associated with poultry meat consumption Food Rev. Int. 39 2023 2107 2121
Myintzaw P. Moran F. Jaiswal A.K. Campylobacteriosis, consumer's risk perception, and knowledge associated with domestic poultry handling in Ireland J. Food Saf. 40 2020 e12799
Nachamkin I. Ung H. Li M. Increasing fluoroquinolone resistance in Campylobacter jejuni, Pennsylvania, USA,1982-2001 Emerg. Infect. Dis. 8 2002 1501 1503 12498672 10.3201/eid0812.020115 PMC2738503
Nafarrate I. Mateo E. Miranda-Cadena K. Lasagabaster A. Isolation, host specificity and genetic characterization of Campylobacter specific bacteriophages from poultry and swine sources Food Microbiol. 97 2021 103742 10.1016/j.fm.2021.103742 33653521
Näther G. Alter T. Martin A. Ellerbroek L. Analysis of risk factors for Campylobacter species infection in broiler flocks Poult. Sci. 88 2009 1299 1305 19439643 10.3382/ps.2008-00389
National Chicken Council Vertical Integration 2019 The National Chicken Council Washington, DC Accessed Mar. 2019 https://www.nationalchickencouncil.org/industry-issues/vertical-integration
Natsos G. Mouttotou N.K. Ahmad S. Kamran Z. Ioannidis A. Koutoulis K.C. The genus Campylobacter: detection and isolation methods, species identification and typing techniques J. Hell. Vet. Med. Soc. 70 2019 1327 1338
Neal-McKinney J.M. Samuelson D.R. Eucker T.P. Nissen M.S. Crespo R. Konkel M.E. Reducing Campylobacter jejuni colonization of poultry via vaccination PLoS One 9 2014 e114254 10.1371/journal.pone.0114254 PMC4256221 25474206
Neijat M. Shirley R.B. Welsher A. Barton J. Thiery P. Kiarie E. Growth performance, apparent retention of components, and excreta dry matter content in Shaver White Pullets (5 to 16 week of age) in response to dietary supplementation of graded levels of a single strain Bacillus subtilis probiotic Poult. Sci. 98 2019 3777 3786 30839091 10.3382/ps/pez080
Nesbit E.G. Gibbs P. Dreesen D.W. Lee M.D. Epidemiologic features of Campylobacter jejuni isolated from poultry broiler houses and surrounding environments as determined by use of molecular strain typing Am. J. Vet. Res. 62 2001 190 194 11212026 10.2460/ajvr.2001.62.190
Newell D.G. Elvers K.T. Dopfer D. Hansson I. Jones P. James S. Gittins J. Stern N.J. Davies R. Connerton I. Pearson D. Salvat G. Allen V.M. Biosecurity-based interventions and strategies to reduce Campylobacter spp. on poultry farms Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 77 2011 8605 8614 21984249 10.1128/AEM.01090-10 PMC3233073
Newell D.G. Fearnley C. Sources of Campylobacter colonization in broiler chickens Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 69 2003 4343 4351 12902214 10.1128/AEM.69.8.4343-4351.2003 PMC169125
Nishiyama K. Seto Y. Yoshioka K. Kakuda T. Takai S. Yamamoto Y. Mukai T. Lactobacillus gasseri SBT2055 reduces infection by and colonization of Campylobacter jejuni PLoS One 9 2014 e108827 10.1371/journal.pone.0108827 PMC4181664 25264604
Nothaft H. Perez-Muñoz M.E. Gouveia G.J. Duar R.M. Wanford J.J. Lango-Scholey L. Panagos C.G. Srithayakumar V. Plastow G.S. Coros C. Bayliss C.D. Edison A.S. Walter J. Szymanski C.M. Coadministration of the Campylobacter jejuni N-glycan-based vaccine with probiotics improves vaccine performance in broiler chickens Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 83 2017 e01523-17 10.1128/AEM.01523-17 PMC5691412 28939610
Nothaft H. Perez-Munoz M.E. Yang T.F. Murugan A.V.M. Miller M. Kolarich D. Plastow G.S. Walter J. Szymanski C.M. Improving chicken responses to glycoconjugate vaccination against Campylobacter jejuni Front. Microbiol. 12 2021 734526 10.3389/fmicb.2021.734526 PMC8637857 34867850
Ogden I.D. MacRae M. Johnston M. Strachan N.J. Cody A.J. Dingle K.E. Newell D.G. Use of multilocus sequence typing to investigate the association between the presence of Campylobacter spp. in broiler drinking water and Campylobacter colonization in broilers Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 73 2007 5125 5129 17586665 10.1128/AEM.00884-07 PMC1950966
Oh E. Chui L. Bae J. Li V. Ma A. Mutschall S.K. Taboada E.N. McMullen L.M. Jeon B. Frequent implication of multistress-tolerant Campylobacter jejuni in human infections Emerg. Infect. Dis. 6 2018 1037 1044 10.3201/eid2406.171587 PMC6004869 29774830
Okeke I.N. Laxminarayan R. Bhutta Z.A. Duse A.G. Jenkins P. O'Brien T.F. Pablos-Mendez A. Klugman K.P. Antimicrobial resistance in developing countries. Part I: recent trends and current status Lancet Infect. Dis. 5 2005 481 493 16048717 10.1016/S1473-3099(05)70189-4
O'Mahony E. Buckley J.F. Bolton D. Whyte P. Fanning S. Molecular epidemiology of Campylobacter isolates from poultry production units in southern Ireland PLoS One 6 2011 e28490 22163024 10.1371/journal.pone.0028490 PMC3232229
Osiriphun S. Tuitemwong P. Koetsinchai W. Tuitemwong K. Erickson L.E. Model of inactivation of Campylobacter jejuni in poultry scalding J. Food Eng. 110 2012 38 43
Oyarzabal O.A. Reduction of Campylobacter spp. by commercial antimicrobials applied during the processing of broiler chickens: a review from the United States perspective J. Food Prot. 68 2005 1752 1760 21132992 10.4315/0362-028x-68.8.1752
Pacanowski J. Lalande V. Lacombe K. Boudraa C. Lesprit P. Legrand P. Trystram D. Kassis N. Arlet G. Mainardi J.L. Doucet-Populaire F. Girard P.M. Meynard J.L. CAMPYL Study Group Campylobacter bacteremia: clinical features and factors associated with fatal outcome Clin. Infect. Dis. 47 2008 790 796 18699745 10.1086/591530
Peh E. Kittler S. Reich F. Kehrenberg C. Antimicrobial activity of organic acids against Campylobacter spp. and development of combinations—a synergistic effect? PLoS One 15 2020 e0239312 10.1371/journal.pone.0239312 PMC7497993 32941534
Perez-Arnedo I. Gonzalez-Fandos E. Prevalence of Campylobacter spp. in poultry in three Spanish farms, a slaughterhouse and a further processing plant Foods 8 2019 111 30917510 10.3390/foods8030111 PMC6463054
Pérez-Boto D. García-Peña F.J. Abad-Moreno J.C. Hurtado-Pizarro M.D. Pérez-Cobo I. Echeita M.A. Drinking water as the source of Campylobacter coli infection in grandparent heavy breeders Avian Pathol. 39 2010 483 487 21154058 10.1080/03079457.2010.518138
Petersen L. Nielsen E.M. On S.L. Serotype and genotype diversity and hatchery transmission of Campylobacter jejuni in commercial poultry flocks Vet. Microbiol. 82 2001 141 154 11423205 10.1016/s0378-1135(01)00382-0
Peyrat M.B. Soumet C. Maris P. Sanders P. Recovery of Campylobacter jejuni from surfaces of poultry slaughterhouses after cleaning and disinfection procedures: analysis of a potential source of carcass contamination Int. J. Food Microbiol. 124 2008 188 194 18472175 10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2008.03.030
Platts-Mills J.A. Kosek M. Update on the burden of Campylobacter in developing countries Curr. Opin. Infect. Dis. 27 2014 444 450 25023741 10.1097/QCO.0000000000000091 PMC4542018
Poudel S. Jia L. Arick M.A. II Hsu C.Y. Thrash A. Sukumaran A.T. Adhikari P. Kiess A.S. Zhang L. In silico prediction and expression analysis of vaccine candidate genes of Campylobacter jejuni Poult. Sci. 102 2023 102592 10.1016/j.psj.2023.102592 PMC10066559 36972674
Poudel S. Li T. Chen S. Zhang X. Cheng W.H. Sukumaran A.T. Kiess A.S. Zhang L. Prevalence, antimicrobial resistance, and molecular characterization of Campylobacter isolated from broilers and broiler meat raised without antibiotics Microbiol. Spectr. 10 2022 e00251-22 10.1128/spectrum.00251-22 PMC9241809 35536038
Pumtang-On P. Mahony T.J. Hill R.A. Vanniasinkam T. A systematic review of Campylobacter jejuni vaccine candidates for chickens Microorganisms 9 2021 397 33671947 10.3390/microorganisms9020397 PMC7919041
Qin X. Wang X. Shen Z. The rise of antibiotic resistance in Campylobacter Curr. Opin. Gastroenterol. 39 2023 9 15 36504031 10.1097/MOG.0000000000000901
Rahimi E. Momtaz H. Ameri M. Ghasemian-Safaei H. Ali-Kasemi M. Prevalence and antimicrobial resistance of Campylobacter species isolated from chicken carcasses during processing in Iran Poult. Sci. 89 2010 1015 1020 20371855 10.3382/ps.2009-00090
Ramabu S.S. Boxall N.S. Madie P. Fenwick S.G. Some potential sources for transmission of Campylobacter jejuni to broiler chickens Lett. Appl. Microbiol. 39 2004 252 256 15287870 10.1111/j.1472-765X.2004.01573.x
Ramakrishnan A. Schumack N.M. Gariepy C.L. Eggleston H. Nunez G. Espinoza N. Nieto M. Castillo R. Rojas J. Mccoy A.J. Beck Z. Matyas G.R. Alving C.R. Guerry P. Poly F. Laird R.M. Enhanced immunogenicity and protective efficacy of a Campylobacter jejuni conjugate vaccine co-administered with liposomes containing monophosphoryl lipid A and QS-21 mSphere 4 2019 e00101 e00119 31043512 10.1128/mSphere.00101-19 PMC6495334
Rasschaert G. De Zutter L. Herman L. Heyndrickx M. Campylobacter contamination of broilers: the role of transport and slaughterhouse Int. J. Food Microbiol. 322 2020 108564 10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2020.108564 32163798
Rasschaert G. Houf K. De Zutter L. External contamination of Campylobacter-free flocks after transport in cleaned and disinfected containers J. Food Prot. 70 2007 40 46 17265858 10.4315/0362-028x-70.1.40
Ravel A. Pintar K. Nesbitt A. Pollari F. Nonfood-related risk factors of campylobacteriosis in Canada: a matched case-control study BMC Public Health 16 2016 1016-1016 10.1186/s12889-016-3679-4 PMC5039884 27677338
Refrégier-Petton J. Rose N. Denis M. Salvat G. Risk factors for Campylobacter spp. contamination in French broiler-chicken flocks at the end of the rearing period Prev. Vet. Med. 50 2001 89 100 11448497 10.1016/s0167-5877(01)00220-3
Reich F. Atanassova V. Haunhorst E. Klein G. The effects of Campylobacter numbers in caeca on the contamination of broiler carcasses with Campylobacter Int. J. Food Microbiol. 127 2008 116 120 18657873 10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2008.06.018
Richards P.J. Connerton P.L. Connerton I.F. Phage biocontrol of Campylobacter jejuni in chickens does not produce collateral effects on the gut microbiota Front. Microbiol. 10 2019 476 30930877 10.3389/fmicb.2019.00476 PMC6423408
Ricotta E.E. Palmer A. Wymore K. Clogher P. Oosmanally N. Robinson T. Lathrop S. Karr J. Hatch J. Dunn J. Ryan P. Blythe D. Epidemiology and antimicrobial resistance of international travel-associated Campylobacter infections in the United States, 2005–2011 Am. J. Public Health 104 2014 e108 e114 10.2105/AJPH.2013.301867 PMC4056211 24832415
Ridley A. Morris V. Gittins J. Cawthraw S. Edge S. Allen V. Potential sources of Campylobacter infection on chicken farms: contamination and control of broiler harvesting equipment, vehicles and personnel J. Appl. Microbiol. 111 2011 233 244 21535329 10.1111/j.1365-2672.2011.05038.x
Ridley A.M. Toszeghy M.J. Cawthraw S.A. Wassenaar T.M. Newell D.G. Genetic instability is associated with changes in the colonization potential of Campylobacter jejuni in the avian intestine J. Appl. Microbiol. 105 2008 95 104 18298527 10.1111/j.1365-2672.2008.03759.x
Robinson D.A. Infective dose of Campylobacter jejuni in milk Br. Med. J. (Clin. Res. Ed.) 282 1981 1584 10.1136/bmj.282.6276.1584 PMC1505544 6786571
Rodrigues L.C. Cowden J.M. Wheeler J.G. Sethi D. Wall P.G. Cumberland P. Tompkins D.S. Hudson M.J. Roberts J.A. Roderick P.J. The study of infectious intestinal disease in England: risk factors for cases of infectious intestinal disease with Campylobacter jejuni infection Epidemiol. Infect. 127 2001 185 193 11693495 10.1017/s0950268801006057 PMC2869737
Roila R. Ranucci D. Valiani A. Galarini R. Servili M. Branciari R. Antimicrobial and anti-biofilm activity of olive oil by-products against Campylobacter spp. isolated from chicken meat Acta Sci. Pol. Technol. Ailment 18 2019 43 52 10.17306/J.AFS.0629 30927751
Rosenquist H. Sommer H.M. Nielsen N.L. Christensen B.B. The effect of slaughter operations on the contamination of chicken carcasses with thermotolerant Campylobacter Int. J. Food Microbiol. 108 2006 226 232 16478636 10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2005.12.007
Saad A.M. Sitohy M.Z. Ahmed A.I. Rabie N.A. Amin S.A. Aboelenin S.M. Soliman M.M. El-Saadony M.T. Biochemical and functional characterization of kidney bean protein alcalase-hydrolysates and their preservative action on stored chicken meat Molecules 26 2021 4690 34361842 10.3390/molecules26154690 PMC8347104
Sahin O. Luo N. Huang S. Zhang Q. Effect of Campylobacter-specific maternal antibodies on Campylobacter jejuni colonization in young chickens Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 69 2003 5372 5379 12957925 10.1128/AEM.69.9.5372-5379.2003 PMC194908
Sahin O. Morishita T.Y. Zhang Q. Campylobacter colonization in poultry: sources of infection and modes of transmission Anim. Health Res. Rev. 3 2002 95 105 12665109 10.1079/ahrr200244
Sahin O. Zhang Q. Meitzler J.C. Harr B.S. Morishita T.Y. Mohan R. Prevalence, antigenic specificity, and bactericidal activity of poultry anti-Campylobacter maternal antibodies Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 67 2001 3951 3957 11525990 10.1128/AEM.67.9.3951-3957.2001 PMC93114
Sakaridis I. Ellis R.J. Cawthraw S.A. van Vliet A.H. Stekel D.J. Penell J. Chambers M. La Ragione R.M. Cook A.J. Investigating the association between the caecal microbiomes of broilers and Campylobacter burden Front. Microbiol. 9 2018 927 29872425 10.3389/fmicb.2018.00927 PMC5972209
Salehi B. Upadhyay S. Orhan I.E. Jugran A.K. Jayaweera S.L.D. Dias D.A. Sharopov F. Taheri Y. Martins N. Baghalpour N. Therapeutic potential of α-and β-pinene: a miracle gift of nature Biomolecules 9 2019 738 31739596 10.3390/biom9110738 PMC6920849
Salem L. Nashwa M.A.K. Mona S.A. Barakat A.M.A. Antimicrobial resistance of Campylobacter jejuni isolated from chicken, some animal products and human in Kalyoubia, Egypt, with special reference to its viability Benhav. Vet. Med. J. 36 2019 156 163
Sandberg M. Sorensen L.L. Steenberg B. Chowdhury S. Ersboll A.K. Alban L. Risk factors for Campylobacter colonization in Danish broiler flocks, 2010 to 2011 Poult. Sci. 94 2015 447 453 25638473 10.3382/ps/peu065
Santos-Ferreira N. Ferreira V. Teixeira P. Occurrence and multidrug resistance of Campylobacter in chicken meat from different production systems Foods 11 2022 1827 35804643 10.3390/foods11131827 PMC9265442
Schroeder M.W. Eifert J.D. Ponder M.A. Schmale III D.G. Association of Campylobacter spp. levels between chicken grow-out environmental samples and processed carcasses Poult. Sci. 93 2014 734 741 24604869 10.3382/ps.2013-03646
Sears A. Baker M.G. Wilson N. Marshall J. Muellner P. Campbell D.M. Lake R.J. French N.P. Marked campylobacteriosis decline after interventions aimed at poultry N. Z. Emerg. Infect. Dis. 17 2011 1007 1015 10.3201/eid1706.101272 PMC3358198 21749761
Sebald M. Veron M. Base DNA content and classification of Vibrios Ann. Inst. Pasteur (Paris) 105 1963 897 910 14098102
Seliwiorstow T. Baré J. Van Damme I. Uyttendaele M. De Zutter L. Campylobacter carcass contamination throughout the slaughter process of Campylobacter-positive broiler batches Int. J. Food Microbiol. 194 2015 25 31 25461605 10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2014.11.004
Shane S.M. Montrose M.S. Harrington K.S. Transmission of Campylobacter jejuni by the housefly (Musca domestica) Avian Dis. 29 1985 384 391 4026732
Shang Y. Kumar S. Oakley B. Kim W.K. Chicken gut microbiota: importance and detection technology Front. Vet. Sci. 5 2018 254 30406117 10.3389/fvets.2018.00254 PMC6206279
Shange N. Gouws P. Hoffman L.C. Campylobacter and Arcobacter species in food-producing animals: prevalence at primary production and during slaughter World J. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 35 2019 146 31493271 10.1007/s11274-019-2722-x
Shanker S. Lee A. Sorrell T.C. Campylobacter jejuni in broilers: the role of vertical transmission J. Hyg. 96 1986 153 159 3701037 10.1017/s002217240006592x PMC2129649
Shaughnessy R.G. Meade K.G. McGivney B.A. Allan B. O'Farrelly C. Global gene expression analysis of chicken caecal response to Campylobacter jejuni Vet. Immunol. Immunopathol. 142 2011 64 71 21605915 10.1016/j.vetimm.2011.04.010
Sheppard S.K. Maiden M.C.J. The evolution of Campylobacter jejuni and Campylobacter coli Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Biol. 7 2015 a018119 10.1101/cshperspect.a018119 PMC4526750 26101080
Shreeve J.E. Toszeghy M. Pattison M. Newell D.G. Sequential spread of Campylobacter infection in a multipen broiler house Avian Dis. 44 2000 983 988 11195658
Sibanda N. McKenna A. Richmond A. Ricke S.C. Callaway T. Stratakos A.C. Gundogdu O. Corcionivoschi N. A review of the effect of management practices on Campylobacter prevalence in poultry farms Front. Microbiol. 9 2018 2002 30197638 10.3389/fmicb.2018.02002 PMC6117471
Silva J. Leite D. Fernandes M. Mena C. Gibbs P.A. Teixeira P. Campylobacter spp. as a foodborne pathogen: a review Front. Microbiol. 2 2011 200 21991264 10.3389/fmicb.2011.00200 PMC3180643
Silveira V.A.I. Nishio E.K. Freitas C.A.U.Q. Amador I.R. Kobayashi R.K.T. Caretta T. Macedo F. Celligoi M.A.P.C. Production and antimicrobial activity of sophorolipid against Clostridium perfringens and Campylobacter jejuni and their additive interaction with lactic acid Biocatal. Agric. Biotechnol. 21 2019 101287
Šimunović K. Ramić D. Xu C. Smole Možina S. Modulation of Campylobacter jejuni motility, adhesion to polystyrene surfaces, and invasion of INT407 cells by quorum-sensing inhibition Microorganisms 8 2020 104 31940805 10.3390/microorganisms8010104 PMC7022965
Šimunovi´c K. Stefanic P. Klanˇcnik A. Erega A. Mulec I.M. Možina S.S. Bacillus subtilis PS-216 antagonistic activities against Campylobacter jejuni NCTC 11168 are modulated by temperature, oxygen, and growth medium Microorganisms 10 2022 289 35208741 10.3390/microorganisms10020289 PMC8875091
Singh A. Nisaa K. Bhattacharyya S. Mallick A.I. Immunogenicity and protective efficacy of mucosal delivery of recombinant hcp of Campylobacter jejuni Type VI secretion system (T6SS) in chickens Mol. Immunol. 111 2019 182 197 31078054 10.1016/j.molimm.2019.04.016
Skirrow M.B. John McFadyean and the centenary of the first isolation of Campylobacter species Clin. Infect. Dis. 43 2006 1213 1217 17029145 10.1086/508201
Slader J. Domingue G. Jorgensen F. McAlpine K. Owen R.J. Bolton F.J. Humphrey T.J. Impact of transport crate reuse and of catching and processing on Campylobacter and Salmonella contamination of broiler chickens Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 68 2002 713 719 11823211 10.1128/AEM.68.2.713-719.2002 PMC126660
Slavik M.F. Kim J.W. Pharr M.D. Raben D.P. Tsai S. Lobsinger C.M. Effect of trisodium phosphate on Campylobacter attached to post-chill chicken carcasses J. Food Prot. 57 1994 324 326 31113123 10.4315/0362-028X-57.4.324
Smith C.K. Abuoun M. Cawthraw S.A. Humphrey T.J. Rothwell L. Kaiser P. Barrow P.A. Jones M.A. Campylobacter colonization of the chicken induces a proinflammatory response in mucosal tissues FEMS Immunol. Med. Microbiol. 54 2008 114 121 18647351 10.1111/j.1574-695X.2008.00458.x
Smith S. Meade J. Gibbons J. McGill K. Bolton D. Whyte P. The impact of environmental conditions on Campylobacter jejuni survival in broiler faeces and litter Infect. Ecol. Epidemiol. 6 2016 31685-31685 10.3402/iee.v6.31685 PMC4928068 27357236
Sommer H.M. Høg B.B. Larsen L.S. Sørensen A.I.V. Williams N. Merga J.Y. Cerdà-Cuéllar M. Urdaneta S. Dolzd R. Wieczorek K. Osek J. David B. Hofshagen M. Jonsson M. Wagenaarg J.A. Bolder N. Rosenquist H. Analysis of farm specific risk factors for Campylobacter colonization of broilers in six European countries Microb. Risk Anal. 2-3 2016 16 26
Sproston E.L. Wimalarathna H.M.L. Sheppard S.K. Trends in fluoroquinolone resistance in Campylobacter Microb. Genom. 4 2018 e000198 10.1099/mgen.0.000198 PMC6159550 30024366
Stern N.J. Fedorka-Cray P. Bailey J.S. Cox N.A. Craven S.E. Hiett K.L. Musgrove M.T. Ladely S. Cosby D. Mead G.C. Distribution of Campylobacter spp. in selected U.S. poultry production and processing operations J. Food Prot. 64 2001 1705 1710 11726147 10.4315/0362-028x-64.11.1705
Stern N.J. Hiett K.L. Alfredsson G.A. Kristinsson K.G. Reiersen J. Hardardottir H. Briem H. Gunnarsson E. Georgsson F. Lowman R. Berndtson E. Lammerding A.M. Paoli G.M. Musgrove M.T. Campylobacter spp. in Icelandic poultry operations and human disease Epidemiol. Infect. 130 2003 23 32 12613742 10.1017/s0950268802007914 PMC2869935
Taha-Abdelaziz K. Astill J. Kulkarni R.R. Read L.R. Najarian A. Farber J.M. Sharif S. In vitro assessment of immunomodulatory and anti-Campylobacter activities of probiotic lactobacilli Sci. Rep. 9 2019 17903 31784645 10.1038/s41598-019-54494-3 PMC6884649
Taha-Abdelaziz K. Hodgins D.C. Alkie T.N. Quinteiro W. Yitbarek A. Astill J. Sharif S. Oral administration of PLGA-encapsulated CpG ODN and Campylobacter jejuni lysate reduces cecal colonization by Campylobacter jejuni in chickens Vaccine 36 2018 388 394 29223488 10.1016/j.vaccine.2017.11.073
Taha-Abdelaziz K. Singh M. Sharif S. Sharma S. Kulkarni R.R. Alizadeh M. Yitbarek A. Helmy Y.A. Intervention strategies to control Campylobacter at different stages of the food chain Microorganisms 11 2023 113 36677405 10.3390/microorganisms11010113 PMC9866650
Takeshita N. Watanabe T. Ishida-Kuroki K. Sekizaki T. Transition of microbiota in chicken cecal droppings from commercial broiler farms BMC Vet. Res. 17 2021 10 33407476 10.1186/s12917-020-02688-7 PMC7789685
Tan S.Y. Tatsumura Y. Alexander Fleming (1881-1955): discoverer of penicillin Singapore Med. J. 56 2015 366 367 26243971 10.11622/smedj.2015105 PMC4520913
Tang Y. Fang L. Xu C. Zhang Q. Antibiotic resistance trends and mechanisms in the foodborne pathogen, Campylobacter Anim. Health Res. Rev. 18 2017 87 98 29166961 10.1017/S1466252317000135
Tang Y. Jiang Q. Tang H. Wang Z. Yin Y. Ren F. Kong L. Jiao X. Huang J. Characterization and prevalence of Campylobacter spp. from broiler chicken rearing period to the slaughtering process in eastern China Front. Vet. Sci. 7 2020 227 32426383 10.3389/fvets.2020.00227 PMC7203416
Tedersoo T. Roasto M. Mäesaar M. Kisand V. Ivanova M. Meremäe K. The prevalence, counts, and MLST genotypes of Campylobacter in poultry meat and genomic comparison with clinical isolates Poult. Sci. 101 2022 101703 10.1016/j.psj.2022.101703 PMC8819112 35124442
Teh A.H.T. Lee S.M. Dykes G.A. Does Campylobacter jejuni form biofilms in food-related environments? Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 80 2014 5154 5160 24928882 10.1128/AEM.01493-14 PMC4136081
Thakur S. Brake J. Keelara S. Zou M. Susick E. Farm and environmental distribution of Campylobacter and Salmonella in broiler flocks Res. Vet. Sci. 94 2013 33 42 22884004 10.1016/j.rvsc.2012.07.014
Thames H.T. Sukumaran A.T. A review of Salmonella and Campylobacter in broiler meat: emerging challenges and food safety measures Foods 11 2020 776 10.3390/foods9060776 PMC7353592 32545362
Thépault A. Guyard-Nicodème M. Rose V. Quesne S. Queguiner M. Houard E. Mégraud F. Rivoal K. Chemaly M. A representative overview of the genetic diversity and lipooligosaccharide sialylation in Campylobacter jejuni along the broiler production chain in France and its comparison with human isolates Int. J. Food Microbiol. 274 2018 20 30 29579648 10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2018.03.010
Thibodeau A. Fravalo P. Yergeau E. Arsenault J. Lahaye L. Letellier A. Chicken caecal microbiome modifications induced by Campylobacter jejuni colonization and by a non-antibiotic feed additive PLoS One 10 2015 e0131978 26161743 10.1371/journal.pone.0131978 PMC4498643
Thomas C. Martin A. Sachsenroder J. Bandick N. Effects of modified atmosphere packaging on an extended-spectrum beta-lactamase-producing Escherichia coli, the microflora, and shelf life of chicken meat Poult. Sci. 99 2020 7004 7014 33248617 10.1016/j.psj.2020.09.021 PMC7704958
Torralbo A. Borge C. Allepuz A. García-Bocanegra I. Sheppard S.K. Perea A. Carbonero A. Prevalence and risk factors of Campylobacter infection in broiler flocks from southern Spain Prev. Vet. Med. 114 2014 106 113 24529344 10.1016/j.prevetmed.2014.01.019
Tram G. Day C.J. Korolik V. Bridging the gap: a role for Campylobacter jejuni biofilms Microorganisms 8 2020 452 32210099 10.3390/microorganisms8030452 PMC7143964
Tribble D.R. Baqar S. Scott D.A. Oplinger M.L. Trespalacios F. Rollins D. Walker R.I. Clements J.D. Walz S. Gibbs P. Burg 3rd E.F. Moran A.P. Applebee L. Bourgeois A.L. Assessment of the duration of protection in Campylobacter jejuni experimental infection in humans Infect. Immun. 78 2010 1750 1759 20086085 10.1128/IAI.01021-09 PMC2849408
Tustin J. Laberge K. Michel P. Reiersen J. Dađadóttir S. Briem H. Harđardóttir H. Kristinsson K. Gunnarsson E. Friđriksdóttir V. Georgsson F. A national epidemic of campylobacteriosis in Iceland, lessons learned Zoonoses Public Health 58 2011 440 447 21824341 10.1111/j.1863-2378.2010.01387.x
Umar S. Maiyah A.T. Mushtaq A. Campylobacter infections in poultry: update on challenges and potential immune interventions Worlds Poult. Sci. J. 72 2016 381 390
Urdaneta S. Lorca-Oró C. Dolz R. López-Soria S. Cerdà-Cuéllar M. In a warm climate, ventilation, indoor temperature and outdoor relative humidity have significant effects on Campylobacter spp. colonization in chicken broiler farms which can occur in only 2 days Food Microbiol. 109 2023 104118 10.1016/j.fm.2022.104118 36309430
USDA Fact Sheet: Veterinary Feed Directive Final Rule and Next Steps 2017 USDA Silver Spring, MD
USDA-FSIS Compliance Guideline for Controlling Salmonella and Campylobacter in Poultry – Second Edition 2008 U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA)-Food Safety and Inspection Service (FSIS) Washington, DC
USDA-FSIS DRAFT FSIS Compliance Guideline for Controlling Salmonella and Campylobacter in Raw Poultry 2015 U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA)-Food Safety and Inspection Service (FSIS) Washington, DC
Ushanov L. Lasareishvili B. Janashia I. Zautner A.E. Application of Campylobacter jejuni phages: challenges and perspectives Animals 11 2020 279 10.3390/ani10020279 PMC7070343 32054081
Van Boeckel T.P. Brower C. Gilbert M. Grenfell B.T. Levin S.A. Robinson T.P. Teillant A. Laxminarayan R. Global trends in antimicrobial use in food animals Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 112 2015 5649 5654 25792457 10.1073/pnas.1503141112 PMC4426470
Vandeplas S. Dubois-Dauphin R. Palm R. Beckers Y. Thonart P. Théwis A. Prevalence and sources of Campylobacter spp. contamination in free-range broiler production in the southern part of Belgium Biotechnol. Agron. Soc. Environ. 14 2010 279 288
Vandeputte J. Martel A. Antonissen G. Verlinden M. De Zutter L. Heyndrickx M. Haesebrouck F. Pasmans F. Garmyn A. Research Note: Lyophilization of hyperimmune egg yolk: effect on antibody titer and protection of broilers against Campylobacter colonization Poult. Sci. 99 2020 2157 2161 32241501 10.1016/j.psj.2019.11.054 PMC7102654
Vandeputte J. Martel A. Van Rysselberghe N. Antonissen G. Verlinden M. De Zutter L. Heyndrickx M. Haesebrouck F. Pasmans F. Garmyn A. In ovo vaccination of broilers against Campylobacter jejuni using a bacterin and subunit vaccine Poult. Sci. 98 2019 5999 6004 31265725 10.3382/ps/pez402
van Der Wielen P.W. Biesterveld S. Notermans S. Hofstra H. Urlings B.A. van Knapen F. Role of volatile fatty acids in development of the cecal microflora in broiler chickens during growth Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 66 2000 2536 2540 10831435 10.1128/aem.66.6.2536-2540.2000 PMC110578
Van Deun K. Pasmans F. Ducatelle R. Flahou B. Vissenberg K. Martel A. Van den Broeck W. Van Immerseel F. Haesebrouck F. Colonization strategy of Campylobacter jejuni results in persistent infection of the chicken gut Vet. Microbiol. 130 2008 285 297 18187272 10.1016/j.vetmic.2007.11.027
Van Gerwe T. Miflin J.K. Templeton J.M. Bouma A. Wagenaar J.A. Jacobs-Reitsma W.F. Stegeman A. Klinkenberg D. Quantifying transmission of Campylobacter jejuni in commercial broiler flocks Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 75 2009 625 628 19047389 10.1128/AEM.01912-08 PMC2632138
Véron M. Chatelain R. Taxonomic study of the genus Campylobacter sebald and Véron and designation of the neotype strain for the type species, Campylobacter fetus (Smith and Taylor) Sebald and Véron Int. J. Syst. Evol. Micr. 23 1973 122 134
Vizzini P. Manzano M. Farre C. Meylheuc T. Chaix C. Ramarao N. Vidic J. Highly sensitive detection of Campylobacter spp. in chicken meat using a silica nanoparticle enhanced dot blot DNA biosensor Biosens. Bioelectron. 171 2021 112689 10.1016/j.bios.2020.112689 33080463
Wagenaar J.A. French N.P. Havelaar A.H. Preventing Campylobacter at the source: why is it so difficult? Clin. Infect. Dis. 57 2013 1600 1606 24014733 10.1093/cid/cit555
Wagenaar J.A. Newell D.G. Kalupahana R.S. Mughini-Gras L. Campylobacter: animal reservoirs, human infections, and options for control Sing A. Pages 159–177 in Zoonoses – Infections Affecting Humans and Animals: Focus on Public Health Aspects 2015 Springer Dordrecht, Netherlands
Wagle B.R. Donoghue A.M. Jesudhasan P.R. Select phytochemicals reduce Campylobacter jejuni in postharvest poultry and modulate the virulence attributes of C. jejuni Front. Microbiol. 12 2021 725087 10.3389/fmicb.2021.725087 PMC8397497 34456896
Wagle B.R. Upadhyay A. Upadhyaya I. Shrestha S. Arsi K. Liyanage R. Venkitanarayanan K. Donoghue D.J. Donoghue A.M. Trans-cinnamaldehyde, eugenol and carvacrol reduce Campylobacter jejuni biofilms and modulate expression of select genes and proteins Front. Microbiol. 10 2019 1837 31456771 10.3389/fmicb.2019.01837 PMC6698798
Wales A.D. Vidal A.B. Davies R.H. Rodgers J.D. Field interventions against colonization of broilers by Campylobacter Compr. Rev. Food Sci. Food Saf. 18 2019 167 188 33337018 10.1111/1541-4337.12397
Wang Y. Dong Y. Deng F. Liu D. Yao H. Zhang Q. Shen J. Liu Z. Gao Y. Wu C. Shen Z. Species shift and multidrug resistance of Campylobacter from chicken and swine, China, 2008–14 J. Antimicrob. Chemother. 71 2016 666 669 26568567 10.1093/jac/dkv382
Wedderkopp A. Rattenborg E. Madsen M. National surveillance of Campylobacter in broilers at slaughter in Denmark in 1998 Avian Dis. 44 2000 993 999 11195660
Weerasooriya G. Khan S. Chousalkar K.K. McWhorter A.R. Invasive potential of sub-lethally injured Campylobacter jejuni and Salmonella typhimurium during storage in chicken meat juice Food Control 135 2022 108823
Wei B. Cha S.Y. Yoon R.H. Kang M. Roh J.H. Seo H.S. Lee J.A. Jang H.K. Prevalence and antimicrobial resistance of Campylobacter spp. isolated from retail chicken and duck meat in South Korea Food Control 62 2016 63 68
World Health Organization (WHO) Pages 255 in Who Estimates of the Global Burden of Foodborne Diseases: Foodborne Disease Burden Epidemiology Reference Group 2007-2015 2015 WHO Accessed Jan. 2023 https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/199350
World Health Organization (WHO). 2020. Campylobacter. Accessed May 2021. https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/campylobacter.
Wysok B. Wojtacka J. Kivistö R. Pathogenicity of Campylobacter strains of poultry and human origin from Poland Int. J. Food Microbiol. 334 2020 108830 10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2020.108830 32841810
Wyszyńska A.K. Godlewska R. Lactic acid bacteria – a promising tool for controlling chicken Campylobacter infection Front. Microbiol. 12 2021 703441 10.3389/fmicb.2021.703441 PMC8506037 34650524
Wyszyńska A. Raczko A. Lis M. Jagusztyn-Krynicka E.K. Oral immunization of chickens with avirulent Salmonella vaccine strain carrying C. jejuni 72Dz/92 cjaA gene elicits specific humoral immune response associated with protection against challenge with wild-type Campylobacter Vaccine 22 2004 1379 1389 15063560 10.1016/j.vaccine.2003.11.001
Yan M. Sahin O. Lin J. Zhang Q. Role of the CmeABC efflux pump in the emergence of fluoroquinolone-resistant Campylobacter under selection pressure J. Antimicrob. Chemother. 58 2006 1154 1159 17023497 10.1093/jac/dkl412
Yang H. Li Y. Johnson M.G. Survival and death of Salmonella typhimurium and Campylobacter jejuni in processing water and on chicken skin during poultry scalding and chilling J. Food Prot. 64 2001 770 776 11403124 10.4315/0362-028x-64.6.770
Zeiger K. Popp J. Becker A. Hankel J. Visscher C. Klein G. Meemken D. Lauric acid as feed additive – an approach to reducing Campylobacter spp. in broiler meat PLoS One 12 2017 e0175693 10.1371/journal.pone.0175693 PMC5395180 28419122
Zhang X. Peng Z. Li P. Mao Y. Shen R. Tao R. Diao X. Liu L. Zhao Y. Luo X. Complex internal microstructure of feather follicles on chicken skin pro-motes the bacterial cross-contamination of carcasses during the slaughtering process Front. Microbiol. 11 2020 571913 10.3389/fmicb.2020.571913 PMC7527466 33042079
Zhang X. Tang M. Zhou Q. Zhang J. Yang X. Gao Y. Prevalence and characteristics of Campylobacter throughout the slaughter process of different broiler batches Front. Microbiol. 9 2018 2092 30233556 10.3389/fmicb.2018.02092 PMC6131577
Zhong X. Wu Q. Zhang J. Ma Z. Wang J. Nie X. Ding Y. Xue L. Chen M. Wu S. Wei X. Zhang Y. Campylobacter jejuni biofilm formation under aerobic conditions and inhibition by ZnO nanoparticles Front. Microbiol. 11 2020 207 32210924 10.3389/fmicb.2020.00207 PMC7076088
Zimmer M. Barnhart H. Idris U. Lee M.D. Detection of Campylobacter jejuni strains in the water lines of a commercial broiler house and their relationship to the strains that colonized the chickens Avian Dis. 47 2003 101 107 12713164 10.1637/0005-2086(2003)047[0101:DOCJSI]2.0.CO;2
Zweifel C. Scheu K.D. Keel M. Renggli F. Stephan R. Occurrence and genotypes of Campylobacter in broiler flocks, other farm animals, and the environment during several rearing periods on selected poultry farms Int. J. Food Microbiol. 125 2008 182 187 18508146 10.1016/j.ijfoodmicro.2008.03.038
